Answer           Question Context
A: Section
135 deals        Q: What
with             does
Corporate        Section 135
Social           of the
Responsibility Companies
(CSR) in         Act, 2013,
India.           pertain to? THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 2019
A: Companies
meeting
certain
criteria, such
as a net worth
of INR 500
crore or more,
turnover of
INR 1,000        Q: Who is
crore or more,required to
or net profit of comply with
INR 5 crore orCSR
more, must provisions
comply with under
CSR              Section
provisions. 135?              ____________
A: Companies
covered by
Section 135 Q: What is
must spend atthe
least 2% of minimum
their average percentage
net profits of of net profit
the preceding that must
three financial be spent on
years on CSR CSR
activities.      activities? ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
A: No,           Q: Can a
unspent CSR company
funds must carry
be transferred forward
to a specified unspent
fund within sixCSR funds
months of the to the next
financial        financial    Last Updated:17-9-2021 ____________
year's end. year?             CHAPTER I
A: Activities
related to
eradicating
hunger,
poverty,
promoting
education,       Q: What
gender           types of
equality,        activities
environmentalqualify as
sustainability, CSR
and more         activities
qualify as       under
CSR              Section
activities.      135?         PRELIMINARY SECTIONS
A: Yes,
companies
meeting CSR
criteria must
constitute a
CSR
committee        Q: Is it
with at least mandatory
three            for
directors,       companies
including one to have a
independent CSR               1. Short title, extent, commencement and
director.        committee? application.
A: Yes,
companies
can
collaborate Q: Can
with other       companies
companies, collaborate
NGOs, or         with other
entities to      entities for
undertake        CSR
CSR projects. projects?
                              2. Definitions.
A: Yes,
companies
must report
their CSR
activities in
their annual
reports,
including        Q: Is there
details on the a
projects         requirement
undertaken for reporting
and funds        on CSR
spent.           activities? CHAPTER II
A: Non-
compliance
can lead to
penalties,       Q: What
including        happens if
fines and        a company
legal actions fails to
against the comply with
company and CSR
its officers. provisions? CONSUMER PROTECTION COUNCILS.
A: Yes,
companies
can
undertake
CSR activities
both within
India and        Q: Can
abroad, as       CSR
long as they activities be
meet the         conducted
specified        outside
criteria.        India?       3. Central Consumer Protection Council.
A: The
objective is to
encourage
companies to
contribute to
the social and Q: What is
environmentalthe
well-being of objective of
society         CSR
through         provisions
responsible in the
business        Companies
practices.      Act, 2013? 4. Procedure for meetings of Central Council.
A: Yes,
private
companies
not meeting
the
prescribed
criteria for
CSR             Q: Can a
expenditure private
can be          limited
exempted        company
from            exempted
complying       from certain
with these      provisions
provisions. of CSR?          5. Objects of Central Council.
                             6. State Consumer Protection Councils.
                             7. Objects of State Council.
                             8. District Consumer Protection Council.
                             9. Objects of District Council.
                             CHAPTER III
                             CENTRAL CONSUMER PROTECTION
                             AUTHORITY
                             10. Establishment of Central Consumer
                             Protection Authority.
                             11. Qualifications, method of recruitment, etc., of
                             Chief Commissioner and Commissioners.
                             12. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings
                             of Central Authority.
                             13. Appointment of officers, experts,
                             professionals and other employees of Central
                             Authority.
                             14. Procedure of Central Authority.
                             15. Investigation Wing.
                             16. Power of District Collector.
                             17. Complaints to authorities.
                             18. Powers and functions of Central Authority.
                             19. Power of Central Authority to refer matter for
                             investigation or to other Regulator.
                             20. Power of Central Authority to recall goods,
                             etc.
                             21. Power of Central Authority to issue directions
                             and penalties against false or misleading
                             advertisements.
                             22. Search and seizure.
                             23. Designation of any statutory authority or
                             body to function as Central Authority.
                             24. Appeal.
                             25. Grants by Central Government.
                             26. Accounts and audit.
                             27. Furnishing of annual reports, etc.
                             CHAPTER IV
                             CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL
                             COMMISSION
                             28. Establishment of District Consumer Disputes
                             Redressal Commission.
                             29. Qualifications, etc., of President and
                             members of District Commission.

                            SECTIONS
                            30. Salaries, allowances and other terms and
                            conditions of service of President and members
                            of District Commission.
                            31. Transitional provision.
                            32. Vacancy in office of member of District
                            Commission.
                            33. Officers and other employees of District
                            Commission.
                            34. Jurisdiction of District Commission.
                            35. Manner in which complaint shall be made.
                            36. Proceedings before District Commission.
                            37. Reference to mediation.
                            38. Procedure on admission of complaint.
                            39. Findings of District Commission.
                            40. Review by District Commission in certain
                            cases.
                            41. Appeal against order of District Commission.
                            42. Establishment of State Consumer Disputes
                            Redressal Commission.
                            43. Qualifications, etc., of President and
                            members of State Commission.
                            44. Salaries, allowances and other terms and
                            conditions of service of President and members
                            of State Commission.
                            45. Transitional provision.
                            46. Officers and employees of State
                            Commission.
                            47. Jurisdiction of State Commission.
                            48. Transfer of cases.
                            49. Procedure applicable to State Commission.
                            50. Review by State Commission in certain
                            cases.
                            51. Appeal to National Commission.
                            52. Hearing of appeal.
                            53. Establishment of National Consumer
                            Disputes Redressal Commission.
                            54. Composition of National Commission.
                            55. Qualifications, etc., of President and
                            members of National Commission.
                            56. Transitional provision.
                            57. Other officers and employees of National
                            Commission.
                            58. Jurisdiction of National Commission.
                            59. Procedure applicable to National
                            Commission.
                            60. Review by National Commission in certain
                            cases.
                            61. Power to set aside ex parte orders.
62. Transfer of cases.
63. Vacancy in office of President of National
Commission.
64. Vacancies or defects in appointment not to
invalidate orders.
65. Service of notice, etc.
66. Experts to assist National Commission or
State Commission.
67. Appeal against order of National
Commission.
68. Finality of orders.
69. Limitation period.
70. Administrative control.
71. Enforcement of orders of District
Commission, State Commission and National
Commission.
72. Penalty for non-compliance of order.
73. Appeal against order passed under section
72.
CHAPTER V
MEDIATION SECTIONS
74. Establishment of consumer mediation cell.
75. Empanelment of mediators.
76. Nomination of mediators from panel.
77. Duty of mediator to disclose certain facts. 78.
Replacement of mediator in certain cases.
79. Procedure for mediation.
80. Settlement through mediation.
81. Recording settlement and passing of order.
CHAPTER VI
PRODUCT LIABILLITY
82. Application of Chapter.
83. Product liability action
84. Liability of product manufacturer.
85. Liability of product service provider.
86. Liability of product sellers.
87. Exceptions to product liability action.
CHAPTER VII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 88. Penalty for
non-compliance of direction of Central Authority.
89. Punishment for false or misleading
advertisement.
90. Punishment for manufacturing for sale or
storing, selling or distributing or importing
products containing adulterant.
91. Punishment for manufacturing for sale or for
storing or selling or distributing or importing
spurious goods.
92. Cognizance of offence by court.
93. Vexatious search.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
94. Measures to prevent unfair trade practices in
e-commerce, direct selling, etc.
95. Presidents, members, Chief Commissioner,
Commissioner and certain officers to be public
servants.
96. Compounding of offences.
97. Manner of crediting penalty.
98. Protection of action taken in good faith.
99. Power to give directions by Central
Government. 100. Act not in derogation of any
other.
101. Power of Central Government to make
rules.
102. Power of State Government to make rules.
103. Power of National Commission to make
regulations.
104. Power of Central Authority to make
regulations.
105. Rules and regulations to be laid before
each House of Parliament.
106. Power to Remove Difficulties.
107. Repeal and savings.

THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 2019
ACT NO. 35 OF 2019

[9th August, 2019.]
An Act to provide for protection of the interests
of consumers and for the said purpose, to
establish authorities for timely and effective
administration and settlement of consumers'
disputes and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth
Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent, commencement and
application.-(1) This Act may be called the
Consumer Protection Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the
State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the
Central Government may, by notification, appoint
and different dates may be appointed for
different States and for different provisions of
this Act and any reference in any such provision
to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to the coming into force
of that provision.
(4) Save as otherwise expressly provided by the
Central Government, by notification, this Act
shall apply to all goods and services.
2. Definitions.-In this Act, unless the context
otherwise requires,-
(1) "advertisement" means any audio or visual
publicity, representation, endorsement or
pronouncement made by means of light, sound,
smoke, gas, print, electronic media, internet or
website and includes any notice, circular, label,
wrapper, invoice or such other documents;
(2) "appropriate laboratory" means a laboratory
or an organisation-
(i) recognised by the Central Government; or
(ii) recognised by a State Government, subject to
such guidelines as may be issued by the Central
Government in this behalf; or
(iii) established by or under any law for the time
being in force, which is maintained, financed or
aided by the Central Government or a State
Government for carrying out analysis or test of
any goods with a view to determining whether
such goods suffer from any defect;
(3) "branch office" means-
(i) any office or place of work described as a
branch by the establishment; or
(ii) any establishment carrying on either the
same or substantially the same activity carried
on by the head office of the establishment;
(4) "Central Authority" means the Central
Consumer Protection Authority established
under
section 10;
(5) "complainant" means-
(i) a consumer; or
(ii) any voluntary consumer association
registered under any law for the time being in
force; or
(iii) the Central Government or any State
Government; or
(iv) the Central Authority; or
(v) one or more consumers, where there are
numerous consumers having the same interest;
or
(vi) in case of death of a consumer, his legal heir
or legal representative; or
(vii) in case of a consumer being a minor, his
parent or legal guardian;
(6) "complaint" means any allegation in writing,
made by a complainant for obtaining any relief
provided by or under this Act, that-
(i) an unfair contract or unfair trade practice or a
restrictive trade practice has been adopted by
any trader or service provider;
(ii) the goods bought by him or agreed to be
bought by him suffer from one or more defects;
(iii) the services hired or availed of or agreed to
be hired or availed of by him suffer from any
deficiency;
(iv) a trader or a service provider, as the case
may be, has charged for the goods or for the
services mentioned in the complaint, a price in
excess of the price-
(a) fixed by or under any law for the time being in
force; or
(b) displayed on the goods or any package
containing such goods; or
(c) displayed on the price list exhibited by him by
or under any law for the time being in force; or
(d) agreed between the parties;
(v) the goods, which are hazardous to life and
safety when used, are being offered for sale to
the public--
(a) in contravention of standards relating to
safety of such goods as required to be complied
with, by or under any law for the time being in
force;
(b) where the trader knows that the goods so
offered are unsafe to the public;
(vi) the services which are hazardous or likely to
be hazardous to life and safety of the public
when used, are being offered by a person who
provides any service and who knows it to be
injurious to life and safety;
(vii) a claim for product liability action lies against
the product manufacturer, product seller or
product service provider, as the case may be;
(7) "consumer" means any person who-
(i) buys any goods for a consideration which has
been paid or promised or partly paid and partly
promised, or under any system of deferred
payment and includes any user of such goods
other than the person who buys such goods for
consideration paid or promised or partly paid or
partly promised, or under any system of deferred
payment, when such use is made with the
approval of such person, but does not include a
person who obtains such goods for resale or for
any commercial purpose; or
(ii) hires or avails of any service for a
consideration which has been paid or promised
or partly paid and partly promised, or under any
system of deferred payment and includes any
beneficiary of such service other than the person
who hires or avails of the services for
consideration paid or promised, or partly paid
and partly promised, or under any system of
deferred payment, when such services are
availed of with the approval of the first
mentioned person, but does not include a person
who avails of such service for any commercial
purpose.
Explanation. -For the purposes of this clause, -
(a) the expression "commercial purpose" does
not include use by a person of goods bought and
used by him exclusively for the purpose of
earning his livelihood, by means of self-
employment;
(b) the expressions "buys any goods" and "hires
or avails any services" includes offline or online
transactions through electronic means or by
teleshopping or direct selling or multi-level
marketing;
(8) "consumer dispute" means a dispute where
the person against whom a complaint has been
made, denies or disputes the allegations
contained in the complaint;
(9) "consumer rights" includes,--
(i) the right to be protected against the marketing
of goods, products or services which are
hazardous to life and property;
(ii) the right to be informed about the quality,
quantity, potency, purity, standard and price of
goods, products or services, as the case may be,
so as to protect the consumer against unfair
trade practices;
(iii) the right to be assured, wherever possible,
access to a variety of goods, products or
services at competitive prices;
(iv) the right to be heard and to be assured that
consumer's interests will receive due
consideration at appropriate fora;
(v) the right to seek redressal against unfair
trade practice or restrictive trade practices or
unscrupulous exploitation of consumers; and (vi)
the right to consumer awareness;
(10) "defect" means any fault, imperfection or
shortcoming in the quality, quantity, potency,
purity or standard which is required to be
maintained by or under any law for the time
being in force or under any contract, express or
implied or as is claimed by the trader in any
manner whatsoever in relation to any goods or
product and the expression "defective" shall be
construed accordingly;
(11) "deficiency" means any fault, imperfection,
shortcoming or inadequacy in the quality, nature
and manner of performance which is required to
be maintained by or under any law for the time
being in force or has been undertaken to be
performed by a person in pursuance of a
contract or otherwise in relation to any service
and includes-
(i) any act of negligence or omission or
commission by such person which causes loss
or injury to the consumer; and
(ii) deliberate withholding of relevant information
by such person to the consumer;
(12) "design", in relation to a product, means the
intended or known physical and material
characteristics of such product and includes any
intended or known formulation or content of such
product and the usual result of the intended
manufacturing or other process used to produce
such product;
(13) "direct selling" means marketing, distribution
and sale of goods or provision of services
through a network of sellers, other than through
a permanent retail location;
(14) "Director-General" means the Director-
General appointed under sub-section (2) of
section
15;
(15) "District Commission" means a District
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission
established under sub-section (1) of section 28;
(16) "e-commerce" means buying or selling of
goods or services including digital products over
digital or electronic network;
(17) "electronic service provider" means a
person who provides technologies or processes
to enable a product seller to engage in
advertising or selling goods or services to a
consumer and includes any online market place
or online auction sites;
(18) "endorsement", in relation to an
advertisement, means-
(i) any message, verbal statement,
demonstration; or
(ii) depiction of the name, signature, likeness or
other identifiable personal characteristics of an
individual; or
(iii) depiction of the name or seal of any
institution or organisation, which makes the
consumer to believe that it reflects the opinion,
finding or experience of the person making such
endorsement;
(19) "establishment" includes an advertising
agency, commission agent, manufacturing,
trading or any other commercial agency which
carries on any business, trade or profession or
any work in connection with or incidental or
ancillary to any commercial activity, trade or
profession, or such other class or classes of
persons including public utility entities in the
manner as may be prescribed;
(20) "express warranty" means any material
statement, affirmation of fact, promise or
description relating to a product or service
warranting that it conforms to such material
statement, affirmation, promise or description
and includes any sample or model of a product
warranting that the whole of such product
conforms to such sample or model;
(21) "goods" means every kind of movable
property and includes "food" as defined in clause
(j) of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Food
Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006);
(22) "harm", in relation to a product liability,
includes- (i) damage to any property, other than
the product itself;
(ii) personal injury, illness or death;
(iii) mental agony or emotional distress attendant
to personal injury or illness or damage to
property; or
(iv) any loss of consortium or services or other
loss resulting from a harm referred to in
subclause (i) or sub-clause (ii) or sub-clause (iii),
but shall not include any harm caused to a
product itself or any damage to the property on
account of breach of warranty conditions or any
commercial or economic loss, including any
direct, incidental or consequential loss relating
thereto;
(23) "injury" means any harm whatever illegally
caused to any person, in body, mind or property;
(24) "manufacturer" means a person who-
(i) makes any goods or parts thereof; or
(ii) assembles any goods or parts thereof made
by others; or
(iii) puts or causes to be put his own mark on any
goods made by any other person;
(25) "mediation" means the process by which a
mediator mediates the consumer disputes;
(26) "mediator" means a mediator referred to in
section 75;
(27) "member" includes the President and a
member of the National Commission or a State
Commission or a District Commission, as the
case may be;
(28) "misleading advertisement" in relation to
any product or service, means an advertisement,
which-
(i) falsely describes such product or service; or
(ii) gives a false guarantee to, or is likely to
mislead the consumers as to the nature,
substance, quantity or quality of such product or
service; or
(iii) conveys an express or implied
representation which, if made by the
manufacturer or seller or service provider
thereof, would constitute an unfair trade practice;
or (iv) deliberately conceals important
information;
(29) "National Commission" means the National
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission
established under sub-section (1) of section 53;
(30) "notification" means a notification published
in the Official Gazette and the term "notify" shall
be construed accordingly;
(31) "person" includes--
(i) an individual;
(ii) a firm whether registered or not;
(iii) a Hindu undivided family;
(iv) a co-operative society;
(v) an association of persons whether registered
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860
(21 of 1860) or not;
(vi) any corporation, company or a body of
individuals whether incorporated or not;
(vii) any artificial juridical person, not falling
within any of the preceding sub-clauses;
(32) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules
made by the Central Government, or, as the
case may be, the State Government;
(33) "product" means any article or goods or
substance or raw material or any extended cycle
of such product, which may be in gaseous, liquid,
or solid state possessing intrinsic value which is
capable of delivery either as wholly assembled
or as a component part and is produced for
introduction to trade or commerce, but does not
include human tissues, blood, blood products
and organs;
(34) "product liability" means the responsibility of
a product manufacturer or product seller, of any
product or service, to compensate for any harm
caused to a consumer by such defective product
manufactured or sold or by deficiency in services
relating thereto;
(35) "product liability action" means a complaint
filed by a person before a District Commission or
State Commission or National Commission, as
the case may be, for claiming compensation for
the harm caused to him;
(36) "product manufacturer" means a person
who- (i) makes any product or parts thereof; or
(ii) assembles parts thereof made by others; or
(iii) puts or causes to be put his own mark on any
products made by any other person; or
(iv) makes a product and sells, distributes,
leases, installs, prepares, packages, labels,
markets, repairs, maintains such product or is
otherwise involved in placing such product for
commercial purpose; or
(v) designs, produces, fabricates, constructs or
re-manufactures any product before its sale; or
(vi) being a product seller of a product, is also a
manufacturer of such product;
(37) "product seller", in relation to a product,
means a person who, in the course of business,
imports, sells, distributes, leases, installs,
prepares, packages, labels, markets, repairs,
maintains, or otherwise is involved in placing
such product for commercial purpose and
includes--
(i) a manufacturer who is also a product seller; or
(ii) a service provider, but does not include-
(a) a seller of immovable property, unless such
person is engaged in the sale of constructed
house or in the construction of homes or flats;
(b) a provider of professional services in any
transaction in which, the sale or use of a product
is only incidental thereto, but furnishing of
opinion, skill or services being the essence of
such transaction; (c) a person who-
(I) acts only in a financial capacity with respect to
the sale of the product;
(II) is not a manufacturer, wholesaler, distributor,
retailer, direct seller or an electronic service
provider;
(III) leases a product, without having a
reasonable opportunity to inspect and discover
defects in the product, under a lease
arrangement in which the selection, possession,
maintenance, and operation of the product are
controlled by a person other than the lessor;
(38) "product service provider", in relation to a
product, means a person who provides any
service in respect of such product;
(39) "regulations" means the regulations made
by the National Commission, or as the case may
be, the Central Authority;
(40) "Regulator" means a body or any authority
established under any other law for the time
being in force;
(41) "restrictive trade practice" means a trade
practice which tends to bring about manipulation
of price or its conditions of delivery or to affect
flow of supplies in the market relating to goods
or services in such a manner as to impose on
the consumers unjustified costs or restrictions
and shall include--
(i) delay beyond the period agreed to by a trader
in supply of such goods or in providing the
services which has led or is likely to lead to rise
in the price;
(ii) any trade practice which requires a consumer
to buy, hire or avail of any goods or, as the case
may be, services as condition precedent for
buying, hiring or availing of other goods or
services;
(42) "service" means service of any description
which is made available to potential users and
includes, but not limited to, the provision of
facilities in connection with banking, financing,
insurance, transport, processing, supply of
electrical or other energy, telecom, boarding or
lodging or both, housing construction,
entertainment, amusement or the purveying of
news or other information, but does not include
the rendering of any service free of charge or
under a contract of personal service;
(43) "spurious goods" means such goods which
are falsely claimed to be genuine;
(44) "State Commission" means a State
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission
established under sub-section (1) of section 42;
(45) "trader", in relation to any goods, means a
person who sells or distributes any goods for
sale and includes the manufacturer thereof, and
where such goods are sold or distributed in
package form, includes the packer thereof;
(46) "unfair contract" means a contract between
a manufacturer or trader or service provider on
one hand, and a consumer on the other, having
such terms which cause significant change in the
rights of such consumer, including the following,
namely:--
(i) requiring manifestly excessive security
deposits to be given by a consumer for the
performance of contractual obligations; or
(ii) imposing any penalty on the consumer, for
the breach of contract thereof which is wholly
disproportionate to the loss occurred due to such
breach to the other party to the contract; or
(iii) refusing to accept early repayment of debts
on payment of applicable penalty; or
(iv) entitling a party to the contract to terminate
such contract unilaterally, without reasonable
cause; or
(v) permitting or has the effect of permitting one
party to assign the contract to the detriment of
the other party who is a consumer, without his
consent; or
(vi) imposing on the consumer any unreasonable
charge, obligation or condition which puts such
consumer to disadvantage;
(47) "unfair trade practice" means a trade
practice which, for the purpose of promoting the
sale, use or supply of any goods or for the
provision of any service, adopts any unfair
method or unfair or deceptive practice including
any of the following practices, namely:-
(i) making any statement, whether orally or in
writing or by visible representation including by
means of electronic record, which-
(a) falsely represents that the goods are of a
particular standard, quality, quantity, grade,
composition, style or model;
(b) falsely represents that the services are of a
particular standard, quality or grade;
(c) falsely represents any re-built, second-hand,
renovated, reconditioned or old goods as new
goods;
(d) represents that the goods or services have
sponsorship, approval, performance,
characteristics, accessories, uses or benefits
which such goods or services do not have;
(e) represents that the seller or the supplier has
a sponsorship or approval or affiliation which
such seller or supplier does not have;
(f) makes a false or misleading representation
concerning the need for, or the usefulness of,
any goods or services;
(g) gives to the public any warranty or guarantee
of the performance, efficacy or length of life of a
product or of any goods that is not based on an
adequate or proper test thereof:
Provided that where a defence is raised to the
effect that such warranty or guarantee is based
on adequate or proper test, the burden of proof
of such defence shall lie on the person raising
such defence;
(h) makes to the public a representation in a form
that purports to be- (A) a warranty or guarantee
of a product or of any goods or services; or
(B) a promise to replace, maintain or repair an
article or any part thereof or to repeat or continue
a service until it has achieved a specified result,
if such purported warranty or guarantee or
promise is materially misleading or if there is no
reasonable prospect that such warranty,
guarantee or promise will be carried out;
(i) materially misleads the public concerning the
price at which a product or like products or goods
or services, have been or are, ordinarily sold or
provided, and, for this purpose, a representation
as to price shall be deemed to refer to the price
at which the product or goods or services has or
have been sold by sellers or provided by
suppliers generally in the relevant market unless
it is clearly specified to be the price at which the
product has been sold or services have been
provided by the person by whom or on whose
behalf the representation is made;
(j) gives false or misleading facts disparaging the
goods, services or trade of another person.

Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-clause,
a statement that is,-
(A) expressed on an article offered or displayed
for sale, or on its wrapper or container; or
(B) expressed on anything attached to, inserted
in, or accompanying, an article offered or
displayed for sale, or on anything on which the
article is mounted for display or sale; or
(C) contained in or on anything that is sold, sent,
delivered, transmitted or in any other manner
whatsoever made available to a member of the
public, shall be deemed to be a statement made
to the public by, and only by, the person who had
caused the statement to be so expressed, made
or contained;
(ii) permitting the publication of any
advertisement, whether in any newspaper or
otherwise, including by way of electronic record,
for the sale or supply at a bargain price of goods
or services that are not intended to be offered for
sale or supply at the bargain price, or for a period
that is, and in quantities that are, reasonable,
having regard to the nature of the market in
which the business is carried on, the nature and
size of business, and the nature of the
advertisement.

Explanation.-For the purpose of this sub-clause,
"bargain price" means,-
(A) a price that is stated in any advertisement to
be a bargain price, by reference to an ordinary
price or otherwise; or
(B) a price that a person who reads, hears or
sees the advertisement, would reasonably
understand to be a bargain price having regard
to the prices at which the product advertised or
like products are ordinarily sold; (iii) permitting-
(a) the offering of gifts, prizes or other items with
the intention of not providing them as offered or
creating impression that something is being
given or offered free of charge when it is fully or
partly covered by the amount charged, in the
transaction as a whole;
(b) the conduct of any contest, lottery, game of
chance or skill, for the purpose of promoting,
directly or indirectly, the sale, use or supply of
any product or any business interest, except
such contest, lottery, game of chance or skill as
may be prescribed;
(c) withholding from the participants of any
scheme offering gifts, prizes or other items free
of charge on its closure, the information about
final results of the scheme.
Explanation.-For the purpose of this sub-clause,
the participants of a scheme shall be deemed to
have been informed of the final results of the
scheme where such results are within a
reasonable time published, prominently in the
same newspaper in which the scheme was
originally advertised;
(iv) permitting the sale or supply of goods
intended to be used, or are of a kind likely to be
used by consumers, knowing or having reason to
believe that the goods do not comply with the
standards prescribed by the competent authority
relating to performance, composition, contents,
design, constructions, finishing or packaging as
are necessary to prevent or reduce the risk of
injury to the person using the goods;
(v) permitting the hoarding or destruction of
goods, or refusal to sell the goods or to make
them available for sale or to provide any service,
if such hoarding or destruction or refusal raises
or tends to raise or is intended to raise, the cost
of those or other similar goods or services;
(vi) manufacturing of spurious goods or offering
such goods for sale or adopting deceptive
practices in the provision of services;
(vii) not issuing bill or cash memo or receipt for
the goods sold or services rendered in such
manner as may be prescribed;
(viii) refusing, after selling goods or rendering
services, to take back or withdraw defective
goods or to withdraw or discontinue deficient
services and to refund the consideration thereof,
if paid, within the period stipulated in the bill or
cash memo or receipt or in the absence of such
stipulation, within a period of thirty days;
(ix) disclosing to other person any personal
information given in confidence by the consumer
unless such disclosure is made in accordance
with the provisions of any law for the time being
in force.
CHAPTER II
CONSUMER PROTECTION COUNCILS
3. Central Consumer Protection Council.-(1) The
Central Government shall, by notification,
establish with effect from such date as it may
specify in that notification, the Central Consumer
Protection Council to be known as the Central
Council.
(2) The Central Council shall be an advisory
council and consist of the following members,
namely:-
(a) the Minister-in-charge of the Department of
Consumer Affairs in the Central Government,
who shall be the Chairperson; and
(b) such number of other official or non-official
members representing such interests as may be
prescribed.
4. Procedure for meetings of Central Council.-(1)
The Central Council shall meet as and when
necessary, but at least one meeting of the
Council shall be held every year.
(2) The Central Council shall meet at such time
and place as the Chairperson may think fit and
shall observe such procedure in regard to the
transaction of its business as may be prescribed.
5. Objects of Central Council.-The objects of the
Central Council shall be to render advice on
promotion and protection of the consumers'
rights under this Act.
6. State Consumer Protection Councils.-(1)
Every State Government shall, by notification,
establish with effect from such date as it may
specify in such notification, a State Consumer
Protection Council for such State to be known as
the State Council.
(2) The State Council shall be an advisory
council and consist of the following members,
namely:-
(a) the Minister-in-charge of Consumer Affairs in
the State Government who shall be the
Chairperson;
(b) such number of other official or non-official
members representing such interests as may be
prescribed;
(c) such number of other official or non-official
members, not exceeding ten, as may be
nominated by the Central Government.
(3) The State Council shall meet as and when
necessary but not less than two meetings shall
be held every year.
(4) The State Council shall meet at such time
and place as the Chairperson may think fit and
shall observe such procedure in regard to the
transaction of its business, as may be
prescribed.
7. Objects of State Council.-The objects of every
State Council shall be to render advice on
promotion and protection of consumer rights
under this Act within the State.
8. District Consumer Protection Council.-(1) The
State Government shall, by notification, establish
for every District with effect from such date as it
may specify in such notification, a District
Consumer Protection Council to be known as the
District Council.
(2) The District Council shall be an advisory
council and consist of the following members,
namely:-
(a) the Collector of the district (by whatever
name called), who shall be the Chairperson; and
(b) such number of other official and non-official
members representing such interests as may be
prescribed.
(3) The District Council shall meet as and when
necessary but not less than two meetings shall
be held every year.
(4) The District Council shall meet at such time
and place within the district as the Chairperson
may think fit and shall observe such procedure in
regard to the transaction of its business as may
be prescribed.
9. Objects of District Council.-The objects of
every District Council shall be to render advice
on promotion and protection of consumer rights
under this Act within the district. CHAPTER III
CENRAL CONSUMER PROTECTION
AUTHORITY
10. Establishment of Central Consumer
Protection Authority.-(1) The Central
Government shall, by notification, establish with
effect from such date as it may specify in that
notification, a Central Consumer Protection
Authority to be known as the Central Authority to
regulate matters relating to violation of rights of
consumers, unfair trade practices and false or
misleading advertisements which are prejudicial
to the interests of public and consumers and to
promote, protect and enforce the rights of
consumers as a class.
(2) The Central Authority shall consist of a Chief
Commissioner and such number of other
Commissioners as may be prescribed, to be
appointed by the Central Government to
exercise the powers and discharge the functions
under this Act.
(3) The headquarters of the Central Authority
shall be at such place in the National Capital
Region of Delhi, and it shall have regional and
other offices in any other place in India as the
Central Government may decide.
11. Qualifications, method of recruitment, etc., of
Chief Commissioner and Commissioners.- The
Central Government may, by notification, make
rules to provide for the qualifications for
appointment, method of recruitment, procedure
for appointment, term of office, salaries and
allowances, resignation, removal and other
terms and conditions of the service of the Chief
Commissioner and Commissioners of the
Central Authority.
12. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings
of Central Authority.-No act or proceeding of the
Central Authority shall be invalid merely by
reason of-
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the
constitution of, the Central Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person
acting as the Chief Commissioner or as a
Commissioner; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the
Central Authority not affecting the merits of the
case.
13. Appointment of officers, experts,
professionals and other employees of Central
Authority.- (1) The Central Government shall
provide the Central Authority such number of
officers and other employees as it considers
necessary for the efficient performance of its
functions under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and
the other terms and conditions of service of, the
officers and other employees of the Central
Authority appointed under this Act shall be such
as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Authority may engage, in
accordance with the procedure specified by
regulations, such number of experts and
professionals of integrity and ability, who have
special knowledge and experience in the areas
of consumer rights and welfare, consumer
policy, law, medicine, food safety, health,
engineering, product safety, commerce,
economics, public affairs or administration, as it
deems necessary to assist it in the discharge of
its functions under this Act.
14. Procedure of Central Authority. -(1) The
Central Authority shall regulate the procedure for
transaction of its business and allocation of its
business amongst the Chief Commissioner and
Commissioners as may be specified by
regulations.
(2) The Chief Commissioner shall have the
powers of general superintendence, direction
and control in respect of all administrative
matters of the Central Authority:
Provided that the Chief Commissioner may
delegate such of his powers relating to
administrative matters of the Central Authority,
as he may think fit, to any Commissioner
(including Commissioner of a regional office) or
any other officer of the Central Authority.
15. Investigation Wing.-(1) The Central Authority
shall have an Investigation Wing headed by a
Director-General for the purpose of conducting
inquiry or investigation under this Act as may be
directed by the Central Authority.
(2) The Central Government may appoint a
Director-General and such number of Additional
Director-General, Director, Joint Director, Deputy
Director and Assistant Director, from amongst
persons who have experience in investigation
and possess such qualifications, in such
manner, as may be prescribed.
(3) Every Additional Director-General, Director,
Joint Director, Deputy Director and Assistant
Director shall exercise his powers, and discharge
his functions, subject to the general control,
supervision and direction of the Director-
General.
(4) The Director-General may delegate all or any
of his powers to the Additional Director-General
or Director, Joint Director or Deputy Director or
Assistant Director, as the case may be, while
conducting inquiries or investigations under this
Act.
(5) The inquiries or the investigations made by
the Director-General shall be submitted to the
Central Authority in such form, in such manner
and within such time, as may be specified by
regulations.
16. Power of District Collector.-The District
Collector (by whatever name called) may, on a
complaint or on a reference made to him by the
Central Authority or the Commissioner of a
regional office, inquire into or investigate
complaints regarding violation of rights of
consumers as a class, on matters relating to
violations of consumer rights, unfair trade
practices and false or misleading
advertisements, within his jurisdiction and submit
his report to the Central Authority or to the
Commissioner of a regional office, as the case
may be.
17. Complaints to authorities.-A complaint
relating to violation of consumer rights or unfair
trade practices or false or misleading
advertisements which are prejudicial to the
interests of consumers as a class, may be
forwarded either in writing or in electronic mode,
to any one of the authorities, namely, the District
Collector or the Commissioner of regional office
or the Central Authority.
18. Powers and functions of Central Authority.-
(1) The Central Authority shall-
(a) protect, promote and enforce the rights of
consumers as a class, and prevent violation of
consumers rights under this Act;
(b) prevent unfair trade practices and ensure that
no person engages himself in unfair trade
practices;
(c) ensure that no false or misleading
advertisement is made of any goods or services
which contravenes the provisions of this Act or
the rules or regulations made thereunder;
(d) ensure that no person takes part in the
publication of any advertisement which is false or
misleading.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the
provisions contained in sub-section (1), the
Central
Authority may, for any of the purposes
aforesaid,--
(a) inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation to
be made into violations of consumer rights or
unfair trade practices, either suo motu or on a
complaint received or on the directions from the
Central Government;
(b) file complaints before the District
Commission, the State Commission or the
National Commission, as the case may be,
under this Act;
(c) intervene in any proceedings before the
District Commission or the State Commission or
the National Commission, as the case may be, in
respect of any allegation of violation of consumer
rights or unfair trade practices;
(d) review the matters relating to, and the factors
inhibiting enjoyment of, consumer rights,
including safeguards provided for the protection
of consumers under any other law for the time
being in force and recommend appropriate
remedial measures for their effective
implementation;
(e) recommend adoption of international
covenants and best international practices on
consumer rights to ensure effective enforcement
of consumer rights;
(f) undertake and promote research in the field of
consumer rights;
(g) spread and promote awareness on consumer
rights;
(h) encourage non-Governmental organisations
and other institutions working in the field of
consumer rights to co-operate and work with
consumer protection agencies;
(i) mandate the use of unique and universal
goods identifiers in such goods, as may be
necessary, to prevent unfair trade practices and
to protect consumers' interest;
(j) issue safety notices to alert consumers
against dangerous or hazardous or unsafe goods
or services;
(k) advise the Ministries and Departments of the
Central and State Governments on consumer
welfare measures;
(l) issue necessary guidelines to prevent unfair
trade practices and protect consumers' interest.
19. Power of Central Authority to refer matter for
investigation or to other Regulator.-(1) The
Central Authority may, after receiving any
information or complaint or directions from the
Central Government or of its own motion,
conduct or cause to be conducted a preliminary
inquiry as to whether there exists a prima facie
case of violation of consumer rights or any unfair
trade practice or any false or misleading
advertisement, by any person, which is
prejudicial to the public interest or to the interests
of consumers and if it is satisfied that there exists
a prima facie case, it shall cause investigation to
be made by the Director-General or by the
District Collector.
(2) Where, after preliminary inquiry, the Central
Authority is of the opinion that the matter is to be
dealt with by a Regulator established under any
other law for the time being in force, it may refer
such matter to the concerned Regulator along
with its report.
(3) For the purposes of investigation under sub-
section (1), the Central Authority, the Director
General or the District Collector may call upon a
person referred to in sub-section (1) and also
direct him to produce any document or record in
his possession.
20. Power of Central Authority to recall goods,
etc.-Where the Central Authority is satisfied on
the basis of investigation that there is sufficient
evidence to show violation of consumer rights or
unfair trade practice by a person, it may pass
such order as may be necessary, including-
(a) recalling of goods or withdrawal of services
which are dangerous, hazardous or unsafe;
(b) reimbursement of the prices of goods or
services so recalled to purchasers of such goods
or services; and
(c) discontinuation of practices which are unfair
and prejudicial to consumers' interest:
Provided that the Central Authority shall give the
person an opportunity of being heard before
passing an order under this section.
21. Power of Central Authority to issue directions
and penalties against false or misleading
advertisements.-(1) Where the Central Authority
is satisfied after investigation that any
advertisement is false or misleading and is
prejudicial to the interest of any consumer or is in
contravention of consumer rights, it may, by
order, issue directions to the concerned trader or
manufacturer or endorser or advertiser or
publisher, as the case may be, to discontinue
such advertisement or to modify the same in
such manner and within such time as may be
specified in that order.
(2) Notwithstanding the order passed under sub-
section (1), if the Central Authority is of the
opinion that it is necessary to impose a penalty in
respect of such false or misleading
advertisement, by a manufacturer or an
endorser, it may, by order, impose on
manufacturer or endorser a penalty which may
extend to ten lakh rupees:
Provided that the Central Authority may, for
every subsequent contravention by a
manufacturer or endorser, impose a penalty,
which may extend to fifty lakh rupees.
(3) Notwithstanding any order under sub-
sections (1) and (2), where the Central Authority
deems it necessary, it may, by order, prohibit the
endorser of a false or misleading advertisement
from making endorsement of any product or
service for a period which may extend to one
year:
Provided that the Central Authority may, for
every subsequent contravention, prohibit such
endorser from making endorsement in respect of
any product or service for a period which may
extend to three years.
(4) Where the Central Authority is satisfied after
investigation that any person is found to publish,
or is a party to the publication of, a misleading
advertisement, it may impose on such person a
penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
(5) No endorser shall be liable to a penalty under
sub-sections (2) and (3) if he has exercised due
diligence to verify the veracity of the claims
made in the advertisement regarding the product
or service being endorsed by him.
(6) No person shall be liable to such penalty if he
proves that he had published or arranged for the
publication of such advertisement in the ordinary
course of his business:
Provided that no such defence shall be available
to such person if he had previous knowledge of
the order passed by the Central Authority for
withdrawal or modification of such
advertisement.
(7) While determining the penalty under this
section, regard shall be had to the following,
namely: -
(a) the population and the area impacted or
affected by such offence;
(b) the frequency and duration of such offence;
(c) the vulnerability of the class of persons likely
to be adversely affected by such offence; and (d)
the gross revenue from the sales effected by
virtue of such offence.
(8) The Central Authority shall give the person
an opportunity of being heard before an order
under this section is passed.
22. Search and seizure.-(1) For the purpose of
conducting an investigation after preliminary
inquiry under sub-section (1) of section 19, the
Director-General or any other officer authorised
by him in this behalf, or the District Collector, as
the case may be, may, if he has any reason to
believe that any person has violated any
consumer rights or committed unfair trade
practice or causes any false or misleading
advertisement to be made, shall,--
(a) enter at any reasonable time into any such
premises and search for any document or record
or article or any other form of evidence and seize
such document, record, article or such evidence;
(b) make a note or an inventory of such record or
article; or
(c) require any person to produce any record,
register or other document or article.
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), relating to search
and seizure shall apply, as far as may be, for
search and seizure under this Act.
(3) Every document, record or article seized
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) or produced
under clause (c) of that sub-section shall be
returned to the person, from whom they were
seized or who produced the same, within a
period of twenty days of the date of such seizure
or production, as the case may be, after copies
thereof or extracts therefrom certified by that
person, in such manner as may be prescribed,
have been taken.
(4) Where any article seized under sub-section
(1) are subject to speedy or natural decay, the
Director-General or such other officer may
dispose of the article in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(5) In the case of articles other than the articles
referred to in sub-section (4), provisions
contained in clause (c) of sub-section (2) of
section 38 shall mutatis mutandis apply in
relation to analysis or tests.
23. Designation of any statutory authority or
body to function as Central Authority.-The
Central Government may, if it considers
necessary, by notification, designate any
statutory authority or body to exercise the
powers and perform the functions of the Central
Authority referred to in section 10.
24. Appeal.-A person aggrieved by any order
passed by the Central Authority under sections
20 and 21 may file an appeal to the National
Commission within a period of thirty days from
the date of receipt of such order.
25. Grants by Central Government.-The Central
Government may, after due appropriation made
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the
Central Authority grants of such sums of money
as that Government may think fit for being
utilised for the purposes of this Act.
26. Accounts and audit.-(1) The Central Authority
shall maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records and prepare an annual
statement of accounts in such form and manner
as may be prescribed in consultation with the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Central Authority shall be
audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India at such intervals as may be specified by
him and any expenditure incurred in connection
with such audit shall be payable by the Central
Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
or any other person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the
Central Authority shall have the same rights,
privileges and authority in connection with such
audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India generally has, in connection with the audit
of the Government accounts and, in particular,
shall have the right to demand the production of
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other
documents and papers and to inspect any of the
offices of the Central Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Central Authority as
certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India or any other person appointed by him in
this behalf together with the audit report thereon
shall be forwarded annually to the Central
Government which shall cause the same to be
laid before each House of Parliament.
27. Furnishing of annual reports, etc.-(1) The
Central Authority shall prepare once in every
year, in such form, manner and at such time as
may be prescribed, an annual report giving full
account of its activities during the previous year
and such other reports and returns, as may be
directed, and copies of such report and returns
shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
(2) A copy of the annual report received under
sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is received, before each House of
Parliament.
CHAPTER IV
CONSUMER DISPUTER REDRESSAL
COMMISSION
28. Establishment of District Consumer Disputes
Redressal Commission.-(1) The State
Government shall, by notification, establish a
District Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission, to be known as the District
Commission, in each district of the State:
Provided that the State Government may, if it
deems fit, establish more than one District
Commission in a district.
(2) Each District Commission shall consist of-
(a) a President; and
(b) not less than two and not more than such
number of members as may be prescribed, in
consultation with the Central Government.
29. Qualifications, etc., of President and
members of District Commission.-The Central
Government may, by notification, make rules to
provide for the qualifications, method of
recruitment, procedure for appointment, term of
office, resignation and removal of the President
and members of the District Commission.
30. Salaries, allowances and other terms and
conditions of service of President and members
of District Commission.-The State Government
may, by notification, make rules to provide for
salaries and allowances and other terms and
conditions of service of the President, and
members of the District Commission.
31. Transitional provision.-Any person appointed
as President or, as the case may be, a member
of the District Commission immediately before
the commencement of this Act shall hold office
as such as President or, as the case may be, as
member till the completion of his term for which
he has been appointed.
32. Vacancy in office of member of District
Commission.-If, at any time, there is a vacancy
in the office of the President or member of a
District Commission, the State Government may,
by notification, direct-
(a) any other District Commission specified in
that notification to exercise the jurisdiction in
respect of that district also; or
(b) the President or a member of any other
District Commission specified in that notification
to exercise the powers and discharge the
functions of the President or member of that
District Commission also.
33. Officers and other employees of District
Commission.-(1) The State Government shall
provide the District Commission with such
officers and other employees as may be required
to assist the District Commission in the
discharge of its functions.
(2) The officers and other employees of the
District Commission shall discharge their
functions under the general superintendence of
the President of the District Commission.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and
the other terms and conditions of service of, the
officers and other employees of the District
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
34. Jurisdiction of District Commission.-(1)
Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the
District Commission shall have jurisdiction to
entertain complaints where the value of the
goods or services paid as consideration does not
exceed one crore rupees:
Provided that where the Central Government
deems it necessary so to do, it may prescribe
such other value, as it deems fit.
(2) A complaint shall be instituted in a District
Commission within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction,-
(a) the opposite party or each of the opposite
parties, where there are more than one, at the
time of the institution of the complaint, ordinarily
resides or carries on business or has a branch
office or personally works for gain; or
(b) any of the opposite parties, where there are
more than one, at the time of the institution of the
complaint, actually and voluntarily resides, or
carries on business or has a branch office, or
personally works for gain, provided that in such
case the permission of the District Commission
is given; or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises;
or
(d) the complainant resides or personally works
for gain.
(3) The District Commission shall ordinarily
function in the district headquarters and may
perform its functions at such other place in the
district, as the State Government may, in
consultation with the State Commission, notify in
the Official Gazette from time to time.
35. Manner in which complaint shall be made.-
(1) A complaint, in relation to any goods sold or
delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or
any service provided or agreed to be provided,
may be filed with a District Commission by-
(a) the consumer,-
(i) to whom such goods are sold or delivered or
agreed to be sold or delivered or such service is
provided or agreed to be provided; or
(ii) who alleges unfair trade practice in respect of
such goods or service;
(b) any recognised consumer association,
whether the consumer to whom such goods are
sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or
delivered or such service is provided or agreed
to be provided, or who alleges unfair trade
practice in respect of such goods or service, is a
member of such association or not;
(c) one or more consumers, where there are
numerous consumers having the same interest,
with the permission of the District Commission,
on behalf of, or for the benefit of, all consumers
so interested; or
(d) the Central Government, the Central
Authority or the State Government, as the case
may be:
Provided that the complaint under this sub-
section may be filed electronically in such
manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-
section, "recognised consumer association"
means any voluntary consumer association
registered under any law for the time being in
force.
(2) Every complaint filed under sub-section (1)
shall be accompanied with such fee and payable
in such manner, including electronic form, as
may be prescribed.
36. Proceedings before District Commission.-(1)
Every proceeding before the District Commission
shall be conducted by the President of that
Commission and atleast one member thereof,
sitting together:
Provided that where a member, for any reason,
is unable to conduct a proceeding till it is
completed, the President and the other member
shall continue the proceeding from the stage at
which it was last heard by the previous member.
(2) On receipt of a complaint made under section
35, the District Commission may, by order, admit
the complaint for being proceeded with or reject
the same:
Provided that a complaint shall not be rejected
under this section unless an opportunity of being
heard has been given to the complainant:
Provided further that the admissibility of the
complaint shall ordinarily be decided within
twenty-one days from the date on which the
complaint was filed.
(3) Where the District Commission does not
decide the issue of admissibility of the complaint
within the period so specified, it shall be deemed
to have been admitted.
37. Reference to mediation.-(1) At the first
hearing of the complaint after its admission, or at
any later stage, if it appears to the District
Commission that there exists elements of a
settlement which may be acceptable to the
parties, except in such cases as may be
prescribed, it may direct the parties to give in
writing, within five days, consent to have their
dispute settled by mediation in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter V.
(2) Where the parties agree for settlement by
mediation and give their consent in writing, the
District Commission shall, within five days of
receipt of such consent, refer the matter for
mediation, and in such case, the provisions of
Chapter V, relating to mediation, shall apply.
38. Procedure on admission of complaint.-(1)
The District Commission shall, on admission of a
complaint, or in respect of cases referred for
mediation on failure of settlement by mediation,
proceed with such complaint.
(2) Where the complaint relates to any goods,
the District Commission shall,-
(a) refer a copy of the admitted complaint, within
twenty-one days from the date of its admission
to the opposite party mentioned in the complaint
directing him to give his version of the case
within a period of thirty days or such extended
period not exceeding fifteen days as may be
granted by it;
(b) if the opposite party on receipt of a complaint
referred to him under clause (a) denies or
disputes the allegations contained in the
complaint, or omits or fails to take any action to
represent his case within the time given by the
District Commission, proceed to settle the
consumer dispute in the manner specified in
clauses (c) to (g);
(c) if the complaint alleges a defect in the goods
which cannot be determined without proper
analysis or test of the goods, obtain a sample of
the goods from the complainant, seal it and
authenticate it in the manner as may be
prescribed and refer the sample so sealed to the
appropriate laboratory along with a direction that
such laboratory to make an analysis or test,
whichever may be necessary, with a view to
finding out whether such goods suffer from any
defect alleged in the complaint or from any other
defect and to report its findings thereon to the
District Commission within a period of forty-five
days of the receipt of the reference or within
such extended period as may be granted by it;
(d) before any sample of the goods is referred to
any appropriate laboratory under clause (c),
require the complainant to deposit to the credit
of the Commission such fees as may be
specified, for payment to the appropriate
laboratory for carrying out the necessary
analysis or test in relation to the goods in
question;
(e) remit the amount deposited to its credit under
clause (d) to the appropriate laboratory to enable
it to carry out the analysis or test mentioned in
clause (c) and on receipt of the report from the
appropriate laboratory, it shall forward a copy of
the report along with such remarks as it may feel
appropriate to the opposite party;
(f) if any of the parties disputes the correctness
of the findings of the appropriate laboratory, or
disputes the correctness of the methods of
analysis or test adopted by the appropriate
laboratory, require the opposite party or the
complainant to submit in writing his objections
with regard to the report made by the
appropriate laboratory;
(g) give a reasonable opportunity to the
complainant as well as the opposite party of
being heard as to the correctness or otherwise of
the report made by the appropriate laboratory
and also as to the objection made in relation
thereto under clause (f) and issue an appropriate
order under section 39.
(3) The District Commission shall, if the
complaint admitted by it under sub-section (2) of
section 36 relates to goods in respect of which
the procedure specified in sub-section (2) cannot
be followed, or if the complaint relates to any
services,-
(a) refer a copy of such complaint to the opposite
party directing him to give his version of the case
within a period of thirty days or such extended
period not exceeding fifteen days as may be
granted by the District Commission;
(b) if the opposite party, on receipt of a copy of
the complaint, referred to him under clause (a)
denies or disputes the allegations contained in
the complaint, or omits or fails to take any action
to represent his case within the time given by the
District Commission, it shall proceed to settle the
consumer dispute-
(i) on the basis of evidence brought to its notice
by the complainant and the opposite party, if the
opposite party denies or disputes the allegations
contained in the complaint, or
(ii) ex parte on the basis of evidence brought to
its notice by the complainant, where the opposite
party omits or fails to take any action to
represent his case within the time given by the
Commission;
(c) decide the complaint on merits if the
complainant fails to appear on the date of
hearing.
(4) For the purposes of sub-sections (2) and (3),
the District Commission may, by order, require
an electronic service provider to provide such
information, documents or records, as may be
specified in that order.
(5) No proceedings complying with the
procedure laid down in [sub-sections (2) and (3)]
shall be called in question in any court on the
ground that the principles of natural justice have
not been complied with.
(6) Every complaint shall be heard by the District
Commission on the basis of affidavit and
documentary evidence placed on record:
Provided that where an application is made for
hearing or for examination of parties in person or
through video conferencing, the District
Commission may, on sufficient cause being
shown, and after recording its reasons in writing,
allow the same.
(7) Every complaint shall be disposed of as
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall
be made to decide the complaint within a period
of three months from the date of receipt of notice
by opposite party where the complaint does not
require analysis or testing of commodities and
within five months if it requires analysis or testing
of commodities:
Provided that no adjournment shall ordinarily be
granted by the District Commission unless
sufficient cause is shown and the reasons for
grant of adjournment have been recorded in
writing by the Commission:
Provided further that the District Commission
shall make such orders as to the costs
occasioned by the adjournment as may be
specified by regulations:
Provided also that in the event of a complaint
being disposed of after the period so specified,
the District Commission shall record in writing,
the reasons for the same at the time of disposing
of the said complaint.
(8) Where during the pendency of any
proceeding before the District Commission, if it
appears necessary, it may pass such interim
order as is just and proper in the facts and
circumstances of the case.
(9) For the purposes of this section, the District
Commission shall have the same powers as are
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying a suit in
respect of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance
of any defendant or witness and examining the
witness on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any
document or other material object as evidence;
(c) receiving of evidence on affidavits;
(d) the requisitioning of the report of the
concerned analysis or test from the appropriate
laboratory or from any other relevant source;
(e) issuing of commissions for the examination
of any witness, or document; and (f) any other
matter which may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(10) Every proceeding before the District
Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of section 193
and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860),
and the District Commission shall be deemed to
be a criminal court for the purposes of section
195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
(11) Where the complainant is a consumer
referred to in sub-clause (v) of clause (5) of
section 2, the provisions of Order I Rule 8 of the
First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (5 of 1908) shall apply subject to the
modification that every reference therein to a suit
or decree shall be construed as a reference to a
complaint or the order of the District Commission
thereon.
(12) In the event of death of a complainant who
is a consumer or of the opposite party against
whom the complaint has been filed, the
provisions of Order XXII of the First Schedule to
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908)
shall apply subject to the modification that every
reference therein to the plaintiff and the
defendant shall be construed as reference to a
complainant or the opposite party, as the case
may be.
39. Findings of District Commission.-(1) Where
the District Commission is satisfied that the
goods complained against suffer from any of the
defects specified in the complaint or that any of
the allegations contained in the complaint about
the services or any unfair trade practices, or
claims for compensation under product liability
are proved, it shall issue an order to the opposite
party directing him to do one or more of the
following, namely:-
(a) to remove the defect pointed out by the
appropriate laboratory from the goods in
question;
(b) to replace the goods with new goods of
similar description which shall be free from any
defect;
(c) to return to the complainant the price, or, as
the case may be, the charges paid by the
complainant along with such interest on such
price or charges as may be decided;
(d) to pay such amount as may be awarded by it
as compensation to the consumer for any loss or
injury suffered by the consumer due to the
negligence of the opposite party:
Provided that the District Commission shall have
the power to grant punitive damages in such
circumstances as it deems fit;
(e) to pay such amount as may be awarded by it
as compensation in a product liability action
under Chapter VI;
(f) to remove the defects in goods or deficiencies
in the services in question;
(g) to discontinue the unfair trade practice or
restrictive trade practice and not to repeat them;
(h) not to offer the hazardous or unsafe goods
for sale;
(i) to withdraw the hazardous goods from being
offered for sale;
(j) to cease manufacture of hazardous goods
and to desist from offering services which are
hazardous in nature;
(k) to pay such sum as may be determined by it,
if it is of the opinion that loss or injury has been
suffered by a large number of consumers who
are not identifiable conveniently:
Provided that the minimum amount of sum so
payable shall not be less than twenty-five per
cent. of the value of such defective goods sold or
service provided, as the case may be, to such
consumers;
(l) to issue corrective advertisement to neutralise
the effect of misleading advertisement at the
cost of the opposite party responsible for issuing
such misleading advertisement;
(m) to provide for adequate costs to parties; and
(n) to cease and desist from issuing any
misleading advertisement.
(2) Any amount obtained under sub-section (1)
shall be credited to such fund and utilised in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) In any proceeding conducted by the
President and a member and if they differ on any
point or points, they shall state the point or points
on which they differ and refer the same to
another member for hearing on such point or
points and the opinion of the majority shall be
the order of the District Commission:
Provided that the other member shall give his
opinion on such point or points referred to him
within a period of one month from the date of
such reference.
(4) Every order made by the District Commission
under sub-section (1) shall be signed by the
President and the member who conducted the
proceeding:
Provided that where the order is made as per
majority opinion under sub-section (3), such
order shall also be signed by the other member.
40. Review by District Commission in certain
cases.-The District Commission shall have the
power to review any of the order passed by it if
there is an error apparent on the face of the
record, either of its own motion or on an
application made by any of the parties within
thirty days of such order.
41. Appeal against order of District
Commission.-Any person aggrieved by an order
made by the District Commission may prefer an
appeal against such order to the State
Commission on the grounds of facts or law within
a period of forty-five days from the date of the
order, in such form and manner, as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the State Commission may
entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
period of forty-five days, if it is satisfied that there
was sufficient cause for not filing it within that
period:
Provided further that no appeal by a person, who
is required to pay any amount in terms of an
order of the District Commission, shall be
entertained by the State Commission unless the
appellant has deposited fifty per cent. of that
amount in the manner as may be prescribed:
Provided also that no appeal shall lie from any
order passed under sub-section (1) of section 81
by the District Commission pursuant to a
settlement by mediation under section 80.
42. Establishment of State Consumer Disputes
Redressal Commission.-(1) The State
Government shall, by notification, establish a
State Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission, to be known as the State
Commission, in the State.
(2) The State Commission shall ordinarily
function at the State capital and perform its
functions at such other places as the State
Government may in consultation with the State
Commission notify in the Official Gazette:
Provided that the State Government may, by
notification, establish regional benches of the
State Commission, at such places, as it deems
fit.
(3) Each State Commission shall consist of-
(a) a President; and
(b) not less than four or not more than such
number of members as may be prescribed in
consultation with the Central Government.
43. Qualifications, etc., of President and
members of State Commission.-The Central
Government may, by notification, make rules to
provide for the qualification for appointment,
method of recruitment, procedure of
appointment, term of office, resignation and
removal of the President and members of the
State Commission.
44. Salaries, allowances and other terms and
conditions of service of President and members
of State Commission.-The State Government
may, by notification, make rules to provide for
salaries and allowances and other terms and
conditions of service of the President and
members of the State Commission.
45. Transitional provision.-Any person appointed
as President or, as the case may be, a member
of the State Commission immediately before the
commencement of this Act shall hold office as
such, as President or member, as the case may
be, till the completion of his term.
46. Officers and employees of State
Commission.-(1) The State Government shall
determine the nature and categories of the
officers and other employees required to assist
the State Commission in the discharge of its
functions and provide the Commission with such
officers and other employees as it may think fit.
(2) The officers and other employees of the State
Commission shall discharge their functions under
the general superintendence of the President.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and
the other terms and conditions of service of, the
officers and other employees of the State
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
47. Jurisdiction of State Commission.-(1) Subject
to the other provisions of this Act, the State
Commission shall have jurisdiction-
(a) to entertain-
(i) complaints where the value of the goods or
services paid as consideration, exceeds rupees
one crore, but does not exceed rupees ten crore:
Provided that where the Central Government
deems it necessary so to do, it may prescribe
such other value, as it deems fit;
(ii) complaints against unfair contracts, where
the value of goods or services paid as
consideration does not exceed ten crore rupees;
(iii) appeals against the orders of any District
Commission within the State; and
(b) to call for the records and pass appropriate
orders in any consumer dispute which is pending
before or has been decided by any District
Commission within the State, where it appears to
the State Commission that such District
Commission has exercised a jurisdiction not
vested in it by law, or has failed to exercise a
jurisdiction so vested or has acted in exercise of
its jurisdiction illegally or with material
irregularity.
(2) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the
State Commission may be exercised by Benches
thereof, and a Bench may be constituted by the
President with one or more members as the
President may deem fit:
Provided that the senior-most member shall
preside over the Bench.
(3) Where the members of a Bench differ in
opinion on any point, the points shall be decided
according to the opinion of the majority, if there
is a majority, but if the members are equally
divided, they shall state the point or points on
which they differ, and make a reference to the
President who shall either hear the point or
points himself or refer the case for hearing on
such point or points by one or more of the other
members and such point or points shall be
decided according to the opinion of the majority
of the members who have heard the case,
including those who first heard it:
Provided that the President or the other
members, as the case may be, shall give opinion
on the point or points so referred within a period
of one month from the date of such reference.
(4) A complaint shall be instituted in a State
Commission within the limits of whose
jurisdiction,--
(a) the opposite party or each of the opposite
parties, where there are more than one, at the
time of the institution of the complaint, ordinarily
resides or carries on business or has a branch
office or personally works for gain; or
(b) any of the opposite parties, where there are
more than one, at the time of the institution of the
complaint, actually and voluntarily resides, or
carries on business or has a branch office or
personally works for gain, provided in such case,
the permission of the State Commission is given;
or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises;
or
(d) the complainant resides or personally works
for gain.
48. Transfer of cases.-On the application of the
complainant or of its own motion, the State
Commission may, at any stage of the
proceeding, transfer any complaint pending
before a District Commission to another District
Commission within the State if the interest of
justice so requires.
49. Procedure applicable to State Commission.-
(1) The provisions relating to complaints under
sections 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39 shall, with such
modifications as may be necessary, be
applicable to the disposal of complaints by the
State Commission.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-
section (1), the State Commission may also
declare any terms of contract, which is unfair to
any consumer, to be null and void.
50. Review by State Commission in certain
cases.-The State Commission shall have the
power to review any of the order passed by it if
there is an error apparent on the face of the
record, either of its own motion or on an
application made by any of the parties within
thirty days of such order.
51. Appeal to National Commission.-(1) Any
person aggrieved by an order made by the State
Commission in exercise of its powers conferred
by sub-clause (i) or (ii) of clause (a) of sub-
section (1) of section 47 may prefer an appeal
against such order to the National Commission
within a period of thirty days from the date of the
order in such form and manner as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the National Commission shall not
entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said
period of thirty days unless it is satisfied that
there was sufficient cause for not filing it within
that period:
Provided further that no appeal by a person, who
is required to pay any amount in terms of an
order of the State Commission, shall be
entertained by the National Commission unless
the appellant has deposited fifty per cent. of that
amount in the manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided under
this Act or by any other law for the time being in
force, an appeal shall lie to the National
Commission from any order passed in appeal by
any State Commission, if the National
Commission is satisfied that the case involves a
substantial question of law.
(3) In an appeal involving a question of law, the
memorandum of appeal shall precisely state the
substantial question of law involved in the
appeal.
(4) Where the National Commission is satisfied
that a substantial question of law is involved in
any case, it shall formulate that question and
hear the appeal on that question:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be
deemed to take away or abridge the power of the
National Commission to hear, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, the appeal on any other
substantial question of law, if it is satisfied that
the case involves such question of law.
(5) An appeal may lie to the National
Commission under this section from an order
passed ex parte by the State Commission.
52. Hearing of appeal.-An appeal filed before the
State Commission or the National Commission,
as the case may be, shall be heard as
expeditiously as possible and every endeavour
shall be made to dispose of the appeal within a
period of ninety days from the date of its
admission:
Provided that no adjournment shall ordinarily be
granted by the State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be, unless
sufficient cause is shown and the reasons for
grant of adjournment have been recorded in
writing by such Commission:
Provided further that the State Commission or
the National Commission, as the case may be,
shall make such orders as to the costs
occasioned by the adjournment, as may be
specified by regulations:
Provided also that in the event of an appeal
being disposed of after the period so specified,
the State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be, shall record in
writing the reasons for the same at the time of
disposing of the said appeal.
53. Establishment of National Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission.-(1) The
Central Government shall, by notification,
establish a National Consumer Disputes
Redressal Commission, to be known as the
National Commission.
(2) The National Commission shall ordinarily
function at the National Capital Region and
perform its functions at such other places as the
Central Government may in consultation with the
National Commission notify in the Official
Gazette:
Provided that the Central Government may, by
notification, establish regional Benches of the
National Commission, at such places, as it
deems fit.
54. Composition of National Commission.-The
National Commission shall consist of-
(a) a President; and
(b) not less than four and not more than such
number of members as may be prescribed.
55. Qualifications, etc., of President and
members of National Commission.-(1) The
Central Government may, by notification, make
rules to provide for qualifications, appointment,
term of office, salaries and allowances,
resignation, removal and other terms and
conditions of service of the President and
members of the National Commission:
Provided that the President and members of the
National Commission shall hold office for such
term as specified in the rules made by the
Central Government but not exceeding five years
from the date on which he enters upon his office
and shall be eligible for re-appointment:
Provided further that no President or members
shall hold office as such after he has attained
such age as specified in the rules made by the
Central Government which shall not exceed,-
(a) in the case of the President, the age of
seventy years;
(b) in the case of any other member, the age of
sixty-seven years.
3[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), the qualifications, appointment,
term of office, salaries and allowances,
resignation, removal and the other terms and
conditions of service of the President and other
members of the National Commission appointed
after the commencement of the
Tribunal Reforms Act, 2021, shall be governed
by the provisions of the said Act.]
(2) Neither the salary and allowances nor the
other terms and conditions of service of
President and members of the National
Commission shall be varied to his disadvantage
after his appointment.
56. Transitional provision.-The President and
every other member appointed immediately
before the commencement of section 177 of the
Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017) shall continue to
be governed by the provisions of the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986) and the rules
made there under as if this Act had not come into
force.
57. Other officers and employees of National
Commission.-(1) The Central Government shall
provide, in consultation with the President of the
National Commission, such number of officers
and other employees to assist the National
Commission in the discharge of its functions as it
may think fit.
(2) The officers and other employees of the
National Commission shall discharge their
functions under the general superintendence of
the President of the National Commission.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and
the other terms and conditions of service of, the
officers and other employees of the National
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
58. Jurisdiction of National Commission.-(1)
Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the
National Commission shall have jurisdiction- (a)
to entertain-
(i) complaints where the value of the goods or
services paid as consideration exceeds rupees
ten crore:
Provided that where the Central Government
deems it necessary so to do, it may prescribe
such other value, as it deems fit;
(ii) complaints against unfair contracts, where
the value of goods or services paid as
consideration exceeds ten crore rupees;
(iii) appeals against the orders of any State
Commission;
(iv) appeals against the orders of the Central
Authority; and
(b) to call for the records and pass appropriate
orders in any consumer dispute which is pending
before or has been decided by any State
Commission where it appears to the National
Commission that such State Commission has
exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or
has failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or
has acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction
illegally or with material irregularity.
(2) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the
National Commission may be exercised by
Benches thereof and a Bench may be
constituted by the President with one or more
members as he may deem fit:
Provided that the senior-most member of the
Bench shall preside over the Bench.
(3) Where the members of a Bench differ in
opinion on any point, the points shall be decided
according to the opinion of the majority, if there
is a majority, but if the members are equally
divided, they shall state the point or points on
which they differ, and make a reference to the
President who shall either hear the point or
points himself or refer the case for hearing on
such point or points by one or more of the other
members and such point or points shall be
decided according to the opinion of the majority
of the members who have heard the case,
including those who first heard it:
Provided that the President or the other member,
as the case may be, shall give opinion on the
point or points so referred within a period of two
months from the date of such reference.
59. Procedure applicable to National
Commission.-(1) The provisions relating to
complaints under sections 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39
shall, with such modifications as may be
considered necessary, be applicable to the
disposal of complaints by the National
Commission.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the
National Commission may also declare any
terms of contract, which is unfair to any
consumer to be null and void.
60. Review by National Commission in certain
cases.-The National Commission shall have the
power to review any of the order passed by it if
there is an error apparent on the face of the
record, either of its own motion or on an
application made by any of the parties within
thirty days of such order.
61. Power to set aside ex parte orders.-Where
an order is passed by the National Commission
ex parte, the aggrieved party may make an
application to the Commission for setting aside
such order.
62. Transfer of cases.-On the application of the
complainant or of its own motion, the National
Commission may, at any stage of the
proceeding, in the interest of justice, transfer any
complaint pending before the District
Commission of one State to a District
Commission of another State or before one State
Commission to another State Commission.
63. Vacancy in office of President of National
Commission.-When the office of President of the
National Commission is vacant or a person
occupying such office is, by reason of absence
or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his
office, these shall be performed by the senior-
most member of the National Commission:
Provided that where a retired Judge of a High
Court or a person who has been a Judicial
Member is a member of the National
Commission, such member or where the number
of such members is more than one, the senior-
most person amongst such members, shall
preside over the National Commission in the
absence of President of that Commission.
64. Vacancies or defects in appointment not to
invalidate orders.-No act or proceeding of the
District Commission, the State Commission or
the National Commission shall be invalid by
reason only of the existence of any vacancy
amongst its members or any defect in the
constitution thereof.
65. Service of notice, etc.-(1) All notices,
required by this Act to be served, shall be served
by delivering or transmitting a copy thereof by
registered post acknowledgment due addressed
to opposite party against whom complaint is
made or to the complainant by speed post or by
such courier service, approved by the District
Commission, the State Commission or the
National Commission, as the case may be, or by
any other mode of transmission of documents
including electronic means.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained
in sub-section (1), the notice required by this Act
may be served on an electronic service provider
at the address provided by it on the electronic
platform from where it provides its services as
such and for this purpose, the electronic service
provider shall designate a nodal officer to accept
and process such notices.
(3) When an acknowledgment or any other
receipt purporting to be signed by the opposite
party or his agent or, as the case may be, by the
complainant is received by the District
Commission, the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be, or postal article containing the
notice is received back by such District
Commission, State Commission or the National
Commission, with an endorsement purporting to
have been made by a postal employee or by any
person authorised by the courier service to the
effect that the opposite party or his agent or
complainant had refused to take delivery of the
postal article containing the notice or had refused
to accept the notice by any other means
specified in sub-section (1) when tendered or
transmitted to him, the District Commission or
the State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be, shall declare
that the notice has been duly served on the
opposite party or to the complainant, as the case
may be:
Provided that where the notice was properly
addressed, pre-paid and duly sent by registered
post acknowledgment due, a declaration referred
to in this sub-section shall be made
notwithstanding the fact that the
acknowledgment has been lost or misplaced, or
for any other reason, has not been received by
the District Commission, the State Commission
or the National Commission, as the case may
be, within thirty days from the date of issue of
notice.
(4) All notices required to be served on an
opposite party or to complainant, as the case
may be, shall be deemed to be sufficiently
served, if addressed in the case of the opposite
party, to the place where business or profession
is carried on, and in case of the complainant, the
place where such person actually and voluntarily
resides.
66. Experts to assist National Commission or
State Commission.-Where the National
Commission or the State Commission, as the
case may be, on an application by a complainant
or otherwise, is of the opinion that it involves the
larger interest of consumers, it may direct any
individual or organisation or expert to assist the
National Commission or the State Commission,
as the case may be.
67. Appeal against order of National
Commission.-Any person, aggrieved by an order
made by the National Commission in exercise of
its powers conferred by sub-clause (i) or (ii) of
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 58, may
prefer an appeal against such order to the
Supreme Court within a period of thirty days
from the date of the order:
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain
an appeal after the expiry of the said period of
thirty days if it is satisfied that there was
sufficient cause for not filing it within that period:
Provided further that no appeal by a person who
is required to pay any amount in terms of an
order of the National Commission shall be
entertained by the Supreme Court unless that
person has deposited fifty per cent. of that
amount in the manner as may be prescribed.
68. Finality of orders.-Every order of a District
Commission or the State Commission or the
National Commission, as the case may be, shall,
if no appeal has been preferred against such
order under the provisions of this Act, be final.
69. Limitation period.-(1) The District
Commission, the State Commission or the
National Commission shall not admit a complaint
unless it is filed within two years from the date on
which the cause of action has arisen.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (1), a complaint may be entertained after
the period specified in sub-section (1), if the
complainant satisfies the District Commission,
the State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be, that he had
sufficient cause for not filing the complaint within
such period:
Provided that no such complaint shall be
entertained unless the District Commission or
the State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be, records its
reasons for condoning such delay.
70. Administrative control.-(1) The National
Commission shall have the authority to lay down
such adequate standards in consultation with the
Central Government from time to time, for better
protection of the interests of consumers and for
that purpose, shall have administrative control
over all the
State Commissions in the following matters,
namely:-
(a) monitoring performance of the State
Commissions in terms of their disposal by calling
for periodical returns regarding the institution,
disposal and pendency of cases;
(b) investigating into any allegations against the
President and members of a State Commission
and submitting inquiry report to the State
Government concerned along with copy
endorsed to the Central Government for
necessary action;
(c) issuance of instructions regarding adoption of
uniform procedure in the hearing of matters,
prior service of copies of documents produced
by one party to the opposite parties, furnishing of
english translation of judgments written in any
language, speedy grant of copies of documents;
(d) overseeing the functioning of the State
Commission or the District Commission either by
way of inspection or by any other means, as the
National Commission may like to order from time
to time, to ensure that the objects and purposes
of the Act are best served and the standards set
by the National Commission are implemented
without interfering with their quasi-judicial
freedom.
(2) There shall be a monitoring cell to be
constituted by the President of the National
Commission to oversee the functioning of the
State Commissions from the administrative point
of view.
(3) The State Commission shall have
administrative control over all the District
Commissions within its jurisdiction in all matters
referred to in sub-section (1).
(4) The National Commission and the State
Commissions shall furnish to the Central
Government periodically or as and when
required, any information including the pendency
of cases in such form and manner as may be
prescribed.
(5) The State Commission shall furnish,
periodically or as and when required to the State
Government any information including pendency
of cases in such form and manner as may be
prescribed.
71. Enforcement of orders of District
Commission, State Commission and National
Commission.-Every order made by a District
Commission, State Commission or the National
Commission shall be enforced by it in the same
manner as if it were a decree made by a Court in
a suit before it and the provisions of Order XXI of
the First Schedule to the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) shall, as far as may
be, applicable, subject to the modification that
every reference therein to the decree shall be
construed as reference to the order made under
this Act.
72. Penalty for non-compliance of order.-(1)
Whoever fails to comply with any order made by
the District Commission or the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than one month, but which may extend to three
years, or with fine, which shall not be less than
twenty-five thousand rupees, but which may
extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),
the District Commission, the State Commission
or the National Commission, as the case may
be, shall have the power of a Judicial Magistrate
of first class for the trial of offences under sub-
section (1), and on conferment of such powers,
the District Commission or the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be, shall be deemed to be a Judicial
Magistrate of first class for the purposes of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(3) Save as otherwise provided, the offences
under sub-section (1) shall be tried summarily by
the District Commission or the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be.
73. Appeal against order passed under section
72.-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of
1974), where an order is passed under sub-
section (1) of section
72, an appeal shall lie, both on facts and on law
from-
(a) the order made by the District Commission to
the State Commission; (b) the order made by the
State Commission to the National Commission;
and (c) the order made by the National
Commission to the Supreme Court.
(2) Except as provided in sub-section (1), no
appeal shall lie before any court, from any order
of a District Commission or a State Commission
or the National Commission, as the case may
be.
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be
preferred within a period of thirty days from the
date of order of a District Commission or a State
Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be:
Provided that the State Commission or the
National Commission or the Supreme Court, as
the case may be, may entertain an appeal after
the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is
satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause
for not preferring the appeal within the said
period of thirty days.
CHAPTER V
MEDIATION
74. Establishment of consumer mediation cell.-
(1) The State Government shall establish, by
notification, a consumer mediation cell to be
attached to each of the District Commissions
and the State Commissions of that State.
(2) The Central Government shall establish, by
notification, a consumer mediation cell to be
attached to the National Commission and each
of the regional Benches.
(3) A consumer mediation cell shall consist of
such persons as may be prescribed.
(4) Every consumer mediation cell shall
maintain-
(a) a list of empanelled mediators;
(b) a list of cases handled by the cell;
(c) record of proceeding; and
(d) any other information as may be specified by
regulations.
(5) Every consumer mediation cell shall submit a
quarterly report to the District Commission, State
Commission or the National Commission to
which it is attached, in the manner specified by
regulations.
75. Empanelment of mediators.-(1) For the
purpose of mediation, the National Commission
or the State Commission or the District
Commission, as the case may be, shall prepare
a panel of the mediators to be maintained by the
consumer mediation cell attached to it, on the
recommendation of a selection committee
consisting of the President and a member of that
Commission.
(2) The qualifications and experience required
for empanelment as mediator, the procedure for
empanelment, the manner of training
empanelled mediators, the fee payable to
empanelled mediator, the terms and conditions
for empanelment, the code of conduct for
empanelled mediators, the grounds on which,
and the manner in which, empanelled mediators
shall be removed or empanelment shall be
cancelled and other matters relating thereto,
shall be such as may be specified by
regulations.
(3) The panel of mediators prepared under sub-
section (1) shall be valid for a period of five
years, and the empanelled mediators shall be
eligible to be considered for re-empanelment for
another term, subject to such conditions as may
be specified by regulations.
76. Nomination of mediators from panel.-The
District Commission, the State Commission or
the National Commission shall, while nominating
any person from the panel of mediators referred
to in section 75, consider his suitability for
resolving the consumer dispute involved.
77. Duty of mediator to disclose certain facts.-It
shall be the duty of the mediator to disclose- (a)
any personal, professional or financial interest in
the outcome of the consumer dispute;
(b) the circumstances which may give rise to a
justifiable doubt as to his independence or
impartiality; and
(c) such other facts as may be specified by
regulations.
78. Replacement of mediator in certain cases.-
Where the District Commission or the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be, is satisfied, on the information
furnished by the mediator or on the information
received from any other person including parties
to the complaint and after hearing the mediator,
it shall replace such mediator by another
mediator.
79. Procedure for mediation.-(1) The mediation
shall be held in the consumer mediation cell
attached to the District Commission, the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be.
(2) Where a consumer dispute is referred for
mediation by the District Commission or the
State
Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be, the mediator nominated by such
Commission shall have regard to the rights and
obligations of the parties, the usages of trade, if
any, the circumstances giving rise to the
consumer dispute and such other relevant
factors, as he may deem necessary and shall be
guided by the principles of natural justice while
carrying out mediation.
(3) The mediator so nominated shall conduct
mediation within such time and in such manner
as may be specified by regulations.
80. Settlement through mediation.-(1) Pursuant
to mediation, if an agreement is reached
between the parties with respect to all of the
issues involved in the consumer dispute or with
respect to only some of the issues, the terms of
such agreement shall be reduced to writing
accordingly, and signed by the parties to such
dispute or their authorised representatives.
(2) The mediator shall prepare a settlement
report of the settlement and forward the signed
agreement along with such report to the
concerned Commission.
(3) Where no agreement is reached between the
parties within the specified time or the mediator
is of the opinion that settlement is not possible,
he shall prepare his report accordingly and
submit the same to the concerned Commission.
81. Recording settlement and passing of order.-
(1) The District Commission or the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be, shall, within seven days of the
receipt of the settlement report, pass suitable
order recording such settlement of consumer
dispute and dispose of the matter accordingly.
(2) Where the consumer dispute is settled only in
part, the District Commission or the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be, shall record settlement of the
issues which have been so settled and continue
to hear other issues involved in such consumer
dispute.
(3) Where the consumer dispute could not be
settled by mediation, the District Commission or
the State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be, shall continue
to hear all the issues involved in such consumer
dispute.
CHAPTER VI
PRODUCT LIABILITY
82. Application of Chapter.-This Chapter shall
apply to every claim for compensation under a
product liability action by a complainant for any
harm caused by a defective product
manufactured by a product manufacturer or
serviced by a product service provider or sold by
a product seller.
83. Product liability action.-A product liability
action may be brought by a complainant against
a product manufacturer or a product service
provider or a product seller, as the case may be,
for any harm caused to him on account of a
defective product.
84. Liability of product manufacturer.-(1) A
product manufacturer shall be liable in a product
liability action, if-
(a) the product contains a manufacturing defect;
or
(b) the product is defective in design; or
(c) there is a deviation from manufacturing
specifications; or
(d) the product does not conform to the express
warranty; or
(e) the product fails to contain adequate
instructions of correct usage to prevent any harm
or any warning regarding improper or incorrect
usage.
(2) A product manufacturer shall be liable in a
product liability action even if he proves that he
was not negligent or fraudulent in making the
express warranty of a product.
85. Liability of product service provider.-A
product service provider shall be liable in a
product liability action, if-
(a) the service provided by him was faulty or
imperfect or deficient or inadequate in quality,
nature or manner of performance which is
required to be provided by or under any law for
the time being in force, or pursuant to any
contract or otherwise; or
(b) there was an act of omission or commission
or negligence or conscious withholding any
information which caused harm; or
(c) the service provider did not issue adequate
instructions or warnings to prevent any harm; or
(d) the service did not conform to express
warranty or the terms and conditions of the
contract.
86. Liability of product sellers.-A product seller
who is not a product manufacturer shall be liable
in a product liability action, if-
(a) he has exercised substantial control over the
designing, testing, manufacturing, packaging or
labelling of a product that caused harm; or
(b) he has altered or modified the product and
such alteration or modification was the
substantial factor in causing the harm; or
(c) he has made an express warranty of a
product independent of any express warranty
made by a manufacturer and such product failed
to conform to the express warranty made by the
product seller which caused the harm; or
(d) the product has been sold by him and the
identity of product manufacturer of such product
is not known, or if known, the service of notice or
process or warrant cannot be effected on him or
he is not subject to the law which is in force in
India or the order, if any, passed or to be passed
cannot be enforced against him; or
(e) he failed to exercise reasonable care in
assembling, inspecting or maintaining such
product or he did not pass on the warnings or
instructions of the product manufacturer
regarding the dangers involved or proper usage
of the product while selling such product and
such failure was the proximate cause of the
harm.
87. Exceptions to product liability action.-(1) A
product liability action cannot be brought against
the product seller if, at the time of harm, the
product was misused, altered, or modified.
(2) In any product liability action based on the
failure to provide adequate warnings or
instructions, the product manufacturer shall not
be liable, if-
(a) the product was purchased by an employer
for use at the workplace and the product
manufacturer had provided warnings or
instructions to such employer;
(b) the product was sold as a component or
material to be used in another product and
necessary warnings or instructions were given
by the product manufacturer to the purchaser of
such component or material, but the harm was
caused to the complainant by use of the end
product in which such component or material
was used;
(c) the product was one which was legally meant
to be used or dispensed only by or under the
supervision of an expert or a class of experts
and the product manufacturer had employed
reasonable means to give the warnings or
instructions for usage of such product to such
expert or class of experts; or
(d) the complainant, while using such product,
was under the influence of alcohol or any
prescription drug which had not been prescribed
by a medical practitioner.
(3) A product manufacturer shall not be liable for
failure to instruct or warn about a danger which
is obvious or commonly known to the user or
consumer of such product or which, such user or
consumer, ought to have known, taking into
account the characteristics of such product.
CHAPTER VII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
88. Penalty for non-compliance of direction of
Central Authority.-Whoever, fails to comply with
any direction of the Central Authority under
sections 20 and 21, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months or with fine which may extend to twenty
lakh rupees, or with both.
89. Punishment for false or misleading
advertisement.-Any manufacturer or service
provider who causes a false or misleading
advertisement to be made which is prejudicial to
the interest of consumers shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two
years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh
rupees; and for every subsequent offence, be
punished with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to five years and with fine which may
extend to fifty lakh rupees.
90. Punishment for manufacturing for sale or
storing, selling or distributing or importing
products containing adulterant.-(1) Whoever, by
himself or by any other person on his behalf,
manufactures for sale or stores or sells or
distributes or imports any product containing an
adulterant shall be punished, if such act-
(a) does not result in any injury to the consumer,
with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to six months and with fine which may extend to
one lakh rupees;
(b) causing injury not amounting to grievous hurt
to the consumer, with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year and with fine
which may extend to three lakh rupees;
(c) causing injury resulting in grievous hurt to the
consumer, with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to seven years and with fine which
may extend to five lakh rupees; and
(d) results in the death of a consumer, with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than seven years, but which may extend to
imprisonment for life and with fine which shall not
be less than ten lakh rupees.
(2) The offences under clauses (c) and (d) of
sub-section (1) shall be cognizable and non-
bailable.
(3) Notwithstanding the punishment under sub-
section (1), the court may, in case of first
conviction, suspend any licence issued to the
person referred to in that sub-section, under any
law for the time being in force, for a period up to
two years, and in case of second or subsequent
conviction, cancel the licence.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "adulterant" means any material including
extraneous matter which is employed or used for
making a product unsafe;
(b) "grievous hurt" shall have the same meaning
as assigned to it in section 320 of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860).
91. Punishment for manufacturing for sale or for
storing or selling or distributing or importing
spurious goods.-(1) Whoever, by himself or by
any other person on his behalf, manufactures for
sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports
any spurious goods shall be punished, if such
act-
(a) causing injury not amounting to grievous hurt
to the consumer, with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year and with fine
which may extend to three lakh rupees;
(b) causing injury resulting in grievous hurt to the
consumer, with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to seven years and with fine which
may extend to five lakh rupees;
(c) results in the death of a consumer, with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than seven years, but may extend to
imprisonment for life and with fine which shall not
be less than ten lakh rupees.
(2) The offences under clauses (b) and (c) of
sub-section (1) shall be cognizable and non-
bailable.
(3) Notwithstanding the punishment under sub-
section (1), the court may, in case of first
conviction, suspend any licence issued to the
person referred to in that sub-section, under any
law for the time being in force, for a period up to
two years, and in case of second or subsequent
conviction, cancel the licence.
92. Cognizance of offence by court.-No
cognizance shall be taken by a competent court
of any offence under sections 88 and 89 except
on a complaint filed by the Central Authority or
any officer authorised by it in this behalf.
93. Vexatious search.-The Director General or
any other officer, exercising powers under
section 22, who knows that there are no
reasonable grounds for so doing, and yet-
(a) searches, or causes to be searched any
premises; or
(b) seizes any record, register or other document
or article, shall, for every such offence, be
punished with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to one year, or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
94. Measures to prevent unfair trade practices in
e-commerce, direct selling, etc.-For the purposes
of preventing unfair trade practices in e-
commerce, direct selling and also to protect the
interest and rights of consumers, the Central
Government may take such measures in the
manner as may be prescribed.
95. Presidents, members, Chief Commissioner,
Commissioner and certain officers to be public
servants.-The Presidents and members of the
District Commission, the State Commission and
the National Commission, and officers and other
employees thereof, the Chief Commissioner and
the Commissioner of the Central Authority, the
Director General, the Additional Director
General, the Director, the Joint Director, the
Deputy Director and the Assistant Director and
all other officers and employees of the Central
Authority and other persons performing any duty
under this Act, while acting or purporting to act in
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act,
shall be deemed to be public servants within the
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860).
96. Compounding of offences.-(1) Any offence
punishable under sections 88 and 89, may,
either before or after the institution of the
prosecution, be compounded, on payment of
such amount as may be prescribed:
Provided that no compounding of such offence
shall be made without the leave of the court
before which a complaint has been filed under
section 92:
Provided further that such sum shall not, in any
case, exceed the maximum amount of the fine,
which may be imposed under this Act for the
offence so compounded.
(2) The Central Authority or any officer as may
be specially authorised by him in this behalf, may
compound offences under sub-section (1).
(3) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to
person who commits the same or similar offence,
within a period of three years from the date on
which the first offence, committed by him, was
compounded.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-
section, any second or subsequent offence
committed after the expiry of a period of three
years from the date on which the offence was
previously compounded, shall be deemed to be
a first offence.
(4) Where an offence has been compounded
under sub-section (1), no proceeding or further
proceeding, as the case may be, shall be taken
against the offender in respect of the offence so
compounded.
(5) The acceptance of the sum of money for
compounding an offence in accordance with
sub-section
(1) by the Central Authority or an officer of the
Central Authority empowered in this behalf shall
be deemed to amount to an acquittal within the
meaning of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (2 of 1974).
97. Manner of crediting penalty.-The penalty
collected under section 21 and the amount
collected under section 96 shall be credited to
such fund as may be prescribed.
98. Protection of action taken in good faith.-No
suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall
lie against the Presidents and members of the
District Commission, the State Commission and
the National Commission, the Chief
Commissioner, the Commissioner, any officer or
employee and other person performing any duty
under this Act, for any act which is in good faith
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this
Act or under any rule or order made thereunder.
99. Power to give directions by Central
Government.-(1) Without prejudice to the
foregoing provisions of this Act, the Central
Authority, shall, in exercise of its powers or the
performance of its functions under this Act, be
bound by such directions on questions of policy,
as the Central Government may give in writing to
it from time to time:
Provided that the Central Authority shall, as far
as practicable, be given an opportunity to
express its views before any direction is given
under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government
whether a question is one of policy or not shall
be final.
100. Act not in derogation of any other law.-The
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and
not in derogation of the provisions of any other
law for the time being in force.
101. Power of Central Government to make
rules.-(1) The Central Government may, by
notification, make rules for carrying out any of
the provisions contained in this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for, -
(a) the other class or classes of persons
including public utility entities under clause (19)
of section 2;
(b) the contest, lottery, game of chance or skill
which are to be exempted under item (b) of
subclause (iii) of clause (47) of section 2;
(c) the manner of issuing bill or cash memo or
receipt for goods sold or services rendered
under sub-clause (vii) of clause (47) of section 2;
(d) the number of other official or non-official
members of the Central Council under clause (b)
of sub-section (2) of section 3;
(e) the time and place of meeting of Central
Council and the procedure for the transaction of
its business under sub-section (2) of section 4;
(f) the number of Commissioners in the Central
Authority under sub-section (2) of section 10;
(g) the qualifications for appointment, method of
recruitment, procedure of appointment, term of
office, salaries and allowances, resignation,
removal and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chief Commissioner and other
Commissioners of the Central Authority under
section 11;
(h) the salaries and allowances payable to, and
the other terms and conditions of service of, the
officers and other employees of the Central
Authority under sub-section (2) of section 13;
(i) the qualifications for appointment of Director
General, Additional Director General, Director,
Joint Director, Deputy Director and Assistant
Director and the manner of appointment under
subsection (2) of section 15;
(j) the manner of taking copies or extracts of
document, record or article seized or produced
before returning to the person under sub-section
(3) of section 22;
(k) the officer and the manner of disposing of
articles which are subject to speedy or natural
decay under sub-section (4) of section 22;
(l) the form and manner for preparing annual
statement of accounts by the Central Authority in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India under sub-section (1) of section
26;
(m) the form in which, and the time within which,
an annual report, other reports and returns may
be prepared by the Central Authority under sub-
section (1) of section 27;
(n) the qualifications for appointment, method of
recruitment, procedure for appointment, term of
office, resignation and removal of President and
members of the District Commission under
section 29;
(o) the other value of goods and services in
respect of which the District Commission shall
have jurisdiction to entertain complaints under
proviso to sub-section (1) of section 34;
(p) the manner of electronically filing complaint
under the proviso to sub-section (1) of section
35;
(q) the fee, electronic form and the manner of
payment of fee for filing complaint under sub-
section (2) of section 35;
(r) the cases which may not be referred for
settlement by mediation under sub-section (1) of
section 37;
(s) the manner of authentication of goods
sampled in case of the National Commission
under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 38;
(t) any other matter which may be prescribed
under clause (f) of sub-section (9) of section 38;
(u) the fund where the amount obtained may be
credited and the manner of utilisation of such
amount under sub-section (2) of section 39;
(v) the form and the manner in which appeal may
be preferred to the State Commission under
section 41;
(w) the qualifications for appointment, method of
recruitment, procedure for appointment, term of
office, resignation and removal of the President
and members of the State Commission under
section 43;
(x) the other value of goods and services in
respect of which the State Commission shall
have jurisdiction under the proviso to sub-clause
(i) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 47;
(y) the form and manner of filing appeal to the
National Commission, and the manner of
depositing fifty per cent. of the amount before
filing appeal, under sub-section (1) of section 51;
(z) the number of members of the National
Commission under clause (b) of section 54;
(za) the qualifications, appointment, term of
office, salaries and allowances, resignation,
removal and other terms and conditions of
service of the President and members of the
National Commission under sub-section (1) of
section 55;
(zb) the salaries and allowances payable to, and
other terms and conditions of service of, the
officers and other employees of the National
Commission under sub-section (3) of section 57;
(zc) the other value of goods and services in
respect of which the National Commission shall
have jurisdiction under the proviso to sub-clause
(i) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 58;
(zd) the manner of depositing fifty per cent. of
the amount under the second proviso to section
67;
(ze) the form in which the National Commission
and the State Commission shall furnish
information to the Central Government under
sub-section (4) of section 70;
(zf) the persons in the consumer mediation cell
under sub-section (3) of section 74;
(zg) the measures to be taken by the Central
Government to prevent unfair trade practices in
e-commerce, direct selling under section 94;
(zh) the amount for compounding offences under
sub-section (1) of section 96;
(zi) the fund to which the penalty and amount
collected shall be credited under section 97; and
(zj) any other matter which is to be, or may be,
prescribed, or in respect of which provisions are
to be, or may be, made by rules
102. Power of State Government to make rules.-
(1) The State Governments may, by notification,
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this
Act:
Provided that the Central Government may,
frame model rules in respect of all or any of the
matters with respect to which the State
Government may make rules under this section,
and where any such model rules have been
framed in respect of any such matter, they shall
apply to the State until the rules in respect of
that matter is made by the State Government
and while making any such rules, so far as is
practicable, they shall conform to such model
rules.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power, such rules
may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:-
(a) the other class or classes of persons
including public utility entities under clause (19)
of section 2;
(b) the contest, lottery, game of chance or skill
which are to be exempted under item (b) of sub-
clause (iii) of clause (47) of section 2;
(c) the number of other official or non-official
members of the State Council under clause (b) of
sub-section (2) of section 6;
(d) the time and place of meeting of the State
Council and the procedure for the transaction of
its business under sub-section (4) of section 6;
(e) the number of other official and non-official
members of District Council under clause (b) of
sub-section (2) of section 8;
(f) the time and place of meeting of the District
Council and procedure for the transaction of its
business under sub-section (4) of section 8;
(g) the number of members of the District
Commission under clause (b) of sub-section (2)
of section 28;
(h) the salaries and allowances payable to, and
other terms and conditions of service of, the
President and members of the District
Commission under section 30;
(i) the salaries and allowances payable to, and
other terms and conditions of service of, the
officers and other employees of the District
Commission under sub-section (3) of section 33;
(j) the manner of authentication of goods
sampled by the State Commission and the
District Commission under clause (c) of sub-
section (2) of section 38;
(k) the manner of depositing fifty per cent. of the
amount before filing appeal under second
proviso to section 41;
(l) the number of members of the State
Commission under sub-section (3) of section 42;
(m) the salaries and allowances payable to, and
other terms and conditions of service of, the
President and members of the State
Commission under section 44;
(n) the salaries and allowances payable to, and
other terms and conditions of service of, the
officers and other employees of the State
Commission under sub-section (3) of section 46;
(o) the form in which the State Commission shall
furnish information to the State
Government under sub-section (5) of section 70;
(p) the persons in the consumer mediation cell
under sub-section (3) of section 74;
(q) any other matter which is to be, or may be
prescribed, or in respect of which provisions are
to be, or may be, made by rules.
103. Power of National Commission to make
regulations.-(1) The National Commission may,
with the previous approval of the Central
Government, by notification, make regulations
not inconsistent with this Act to provide for all
matters for which provision is necessary or
expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may make provisions for-
(a) the costs for adjournment to be imposed by
the District Commission under the second
proviso to sub-section (7) of section 38;
(b) the costs for adjournment to be imposed by
the State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be, under the
second proviso to section 52;
(c) the maintenance of any other information by
the consumer mediation cell under sub-section
(4) of section 74;
(d) the manner of submission of quarterly report
by consumer mediation cell to the District
Commission, the State Commission or the
National Commission under sub-section (5) of
section 74;
(e) the qualifications and experience required for
empanelment as mediator, the procedure for
empanelment, the manner of training
empanelled mediators, the fee payable to
empanelled mediator, the terms and conditions
for empanelment, the code of conduct for
empanelled mediators, the grounds on which,
and the manner in which, empanelled mediators
shall be removed or empanelment shall be
cancelled and the other matters relating thereto
under sub-section (2) of section 75;
(f) the conditions for re-empanelment of
mediators for another term under sub-section (3)
of section 75;
(g) the other facts to be disclosed by mediators
under clause (c) of section 77;
(h) the time within which, and the manner in
which, mediation may be conducted under sub-
section (3) of section 79; and
(i) such other matter for which provision is to be,
or may be, made by regulation.
104. Power of Central Authority to make
regulations.-(1) The Central Authority may, with
the previous approval of the Central
Government, by notification, make regulations
not inconsistent with this Act, for the purpose of
giving effect to the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:-
(a) the procedure for engaging experts and
professionals and the number of such experts
and professionals under sub-section (3) of
section 13;
(b) the procedure for transaction of business and
the allocation of business of the Chief
Commissioner and Commissioner under sub-
section (1) of section 14;
(c) the form, manner and time within which,
inquiries or investigation made by the Director-
General shall be submitted to the Central
Authority under sub-section (5) of section 15;
and

(d) such other matter for which provision is to be,
or may be, made by regulation.
105. Rules and regulations to be laid before
each House of Parliament.-(1) Every rule and
every regulation made under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule or
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or regulation.
(2) Every rule made by a State Government
under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be
after it is made, before the State Legislature.
106. Power to Remove Difficulties.-If any
difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of this Act, the Central Government may, by
order in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act as appear to it to be necessary or
expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after
the expiry of a period of two years from the
commencement of this Act.
107. Repeal and savings.-(1) The Consumer
Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986) is hereby
repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done
or any action taken or purported to have been
done or taken under the Act hereby repealed
shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been
done or taken under the corresponding
provisions of this Act.
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-
section (2) shall not be held to prejudice or affect
the general application of section 6 of the
General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) with
regard to the effect of repeal.

1 . 20th July, 2020.-S. 2 [Except clauses (4),
(13), (14), (16), (40)], s. 3 to 9 (both inclusive), s.
28 to 73 (both inclusive) [Except sub-clause (iv)
of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 58], s.
74 to 81 (both inclusive), s. 82 to 87 (both
inclusive),
s. 90 and 91 [Except sections 88, 89, 92 and 93],
s. 95, 98,100 and 101 [Except clauses (f) to (m)
and clauses (zg), (zh) and (zi) of sub-section 2],
s. 102, 103, 105, 106, 107 [Except sections 94,
96, 97, 99, 104], vide notification No. S.O.
2351(E), dated 15th July, 2020, see Gazette of
India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii).
2 . 24th July, 2020.-- S. 2 [clauses (4), (13), (14),
(16), (40)], s. 10 to 27 (both inclusive), sub-
clause (iv) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
section 58, s. 88, 89, 92 and 93, 94, 96, 97 and
99, clause (f) to (m) of sub-section 2 and clauses
(zg), (zh) and (zi) of sub-section 2 of s. 101, 104,
vide notification No. S.O. 2421(E), dated 23rd
July 2020, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,
Part II, sec. 3(ii).

3 . Ins. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 30 (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

                                                               1




ExECUTIvE PROgRAMME
ECONOMIC, COMMERCIAL &
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAWS
Conceptual understanding and application of
compliance mandates of Economic and
Commercial legislation is vital for professionals
like Company Secretaries specifically from the
perspective of compliance risks and especially
when it involves foreign exchange, foreign
investments, competition law aspects, consumer
rights etc. This study aims to provide conceptual
and application oriented understanding of the
subject.
Further, Company Secretary plays advisory,
compliance and representative roles with respect
to various Economic and Commercial Laws
including Foreign Exchange Management Act,
FDI Policy, Foreign Trade Policy, Competition
Law, Consumer Protection Act, law relating Real
Estate Regulation etc. It is important for a
Company Secretary to be well versed with
Economic and Commercial Laws. It is also vital
for students to have working knowledge of
various Economic and Commercial legislations.
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) are private
rights which are applied for, and enforced, by the
owner of the concerned Intellectual Property
(IP). While IPRs are becoming increasingly
important in the global arena, there is a need to
increase awareness on IPRs in India, be it
regarding the IPRs owned by oneself or respect
for others' IPRs. The importance of IPRs as a
marketable financial asset and economic tool
also needs to be recognised. In the Intellectual
Property Rights regime Company Secretary is
also authorized to act as a Trade Marks Agent.
This study material has been prepared to provide
an understanding of certain Economic,
Commercial and Intellectual Property legislations
which have direct bearing on the functioning of
companies. The study material has been divided
into two parts consisting of twenty study lessons.
Part I dealing with Economic and Commercial
Laws consists of Study Lessons I to XIV,
whereas Part II dealing with Intellectual Property
Laws consists of Study Lesson XV to XX.
This study material has been published to aid the
students in preparing for the Economic,
Commercial & Intellectual Property Laws paper
of the CS Executive Programme under ICSI
Syllabus 2022. It has been prepared to provide
understanding of the Economic, Commercial &
Intellectual Property laws thereunder, which
have a bearing on the conduct of corporate
affairs. It is part of the educational kit and takes
the students step by step through each phase of
preparation stressing key concepts, principle,
pointers and procedures.
The legislative changes made upto December,
2022 have been incorporated in the study
material. The students are advised to refer to the
updations at the Regulator's website,
Supplement relevant for the subject issued by
ICSI and ICSI Journal Chartered Secretary and
other publications. Specifically, students are
advised to read "Student Company Secretary" e-
Journal which covers regulatory and other
relevant developments relating to the subject. In
the event of any doubt, student may contact the
Directorate of Academics at
academics@icsi.edu.




9. Law relating to Fugitive Economic Offenders:
Declaration of Fugitive Economic Offender and
Procedure therefor ? Attachment of Property ?
Powers of Director and Other Officers ? Power
of Survey ? Search and Seizure ? Declaration of
Fugitive Economic Offender.
10. Law relating to benami Transactions &
Prohibition: Benami Property ? Benami
Transaction ? Prohibition of Benami Transaction
? Authority & Adjudication of Benami property.
11. Competition Law: Competition Policy ? Anti-
Competitive Agreements ? Abuse of Dominant
Position ? Overview of Combination ? Regulation
of Combinations ? Competition Advocacy ?
Competition Commission of India ? Appellate
Tribunal.
12. Law relating to Consumer Protection:
Consumer Protection in India ? Rights of
Consumers ? Consumer Dispute Redressal
Forums ? Nature and Scope of Remedies ? E-
commerce & Direct Selling Guidelines.
13. Legal Metrology: Standard Weights And
Measures ? Power of inspection, Seizure ?
Declarations on Pre-packaged Commodities ?
Offences and penalties.
14. Real Estate Regulation and Development
Law: Registration of Real Estate Project ? Real
Estate Agents ? Real Estate Regulatory
Authority ? Central Advisory Council ? The Real
Estate Appellate Tribunal ? Offences, Penalties
and Adjudication.
Part II: Intellectual Property Laws (40 Marks)
15. Law relating to Patents: Applications for
Patents ? Publication and Examination of
Applications ? Inventions Not Patentable ?
Opposition Proceedings to Grant of Patents ?
Restoration of Lapsed Patents ? Surrender and
Revocation of Patents ? Working of Patents ?
Compulsory Licences and Revocation ?
Infringement of Patents.
16. Law relating to Trade Marks: Classification of
Goods And Services ? Conditions for
Registration ? Procedure for and Duration of
Registration ? Absolute Grounds for Refusal of
Registration ? Assignability and Transmissibility
of Registered Trademarks ? Collective Marks ?
Certification Trademarks ? Trademark Agent ?
Infringement of Trade Marks.
17. Law relating to Copyright: Meaning of
Copyright ? Works in which Copyright Subsists ?
Registration of Copyright ? Ownership of
Copyright ? Assignment of Copyright ? Term of
Copyright ? Licences by Owners of Copyright ?
Copyright Society ? Infringement of Copyright.
18. Law relating to geographical Indications of
goods : Geographical Indication ? Application for
registration ? Procedure for and Duration of
Registration ? Effect of Registration ? Prohibition
of registration of geographical indication as
Trade Mark.
19. Law relating to Industrial Designs :
Registration of Designs ? Prohibition of
Registration of Certain Designs ? Certificate of
Registration ? Copyright in Registered Designs ?
Industrial and International Exhibitions ? Piracy
of registered design.



LESSON WISE SUMMARY
ECONOMIC, COMMERCIAL & INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY LAWS
PART I: ECONOMIC & COMMERCIAL LAWS
Lesson 1 - Law relating to Foreign Exchange
Management
The Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999
(FEMA) is an Act of the Parliament of India to
consolidate and amend the law relating to
foreign exchange with the objective of facilitating
external trade and payments and for promoting
the orderly development and maintenance of
foreign exchange market in India. The Act
extends to the whole of India and it also applies
to all branches, offices and agencies outside
India owned or controlled by a person resident in
India and also to any contravention thereunder
committed outside India by any person to whom
this Act applies. The management of foreign
exchange is very important in the present day
business. FEMA is a regulatory mechanism that
enables the Reserve Bank of India to pass
regulations and the Central Government to pass
rules relating to foreign exchange in tune with
the Foreign Trade policy of India. The Act is
more transparent in its application as it lays
down the areas requiring specific permissions of
the Reserve Bank/ Government of India on
acquisition/holding of foreign exchange. It
stipulate the strict compliances in case of import,
export, debt funding, equity capital infusion,
transfer of shares etc.
It is expected that, at the end of this lesson,
students will, inter alia, be in a position to
understand the:                                     ?            Concept of FEMA;
                                                                                                   Provisions of
                                                                 Concept of                        Realization,                       Rules and
                                                                 Current Account                   Repatriation       Structure       Regulations
                                                                 Transactions and                  and Surrender      and Overall     framed by
                                                                 Capital Account                   of Foreign         Schemes of      RBI under
                                                    ?            Transactions;    ?                Currency;     ?    FEMA;       ?   FEMA.
Lesson 2 - Foreign Direct Investments -
Regulations & Policy
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is a major
source of non-debt financial resource for the
economic development of India. Foreign
companies invest in India to take advantage of
relatively lower wages, special investment
privileges such as tax exemptions, etc. To
promote Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), the
Government has put in place an investor friendly
policy, wherein except for a small negative list,
most sectors are open for 100% FDI under the
Automatic route.
The objective of the lesson is to familiarize the
students with:
* Eligible Investors under FDI;
                                                                                                   Non-debt
* Entry Routes for Investment i.e. Automatic                                                       Instruments
Route, Government Route, Competent authority                     Prohibited and                    Rules &
etc;                                         ?                   Permitted Sectors;?               Regulations;
                                                                                                   Reporting of
                                                                                                   FDI i.e.
                                                                                                   reporting of
                                                                                                   Inflow/Issue of
                                                                                                   shares/Transfer
                                                                 Modes of                          of shares etc.
                                                                 Payment allowed                   and filing of
                                                                 for receiving FDI                 FCGPR form
* Conditions of FDI in major sector i.e. E-                      in an Indian                      and other
commence activity, Insurance etc.;                ?              Company;          ?               returns.
Lesson 3 - Overseas Direct Investments (ODI)
Overseas Investment means financial
commitment and Overseas Portfolio Investment
by a person resident in India. Overseas
investments by persons resident in India
enhance the scale and scope of business
operations of Indian entrepreneurs by providing
global opportunities for growth. Such ventures
through easier access to technology, research
and development, a wider global market and
reduced cost of capital along with other benefits
increase the competitiveness of Indian entities
and boost their brand value. These overseas
investments are also important drivers of foreign
trade and technology transfer thus boosting
domestic employment, investment and growth
through such inter-linkages. In view of the
evolving needs of businesses in India, in an
increasingly integrated global market, there is
need of Indian corporates to be part of global
value chain and in keeping with the spirit of
liberalization and to promote ease of doing
business, the Central Government and the
Reserve Bank of India have been progressively
simplifying the procedures and rationalizing the
rules and regulations under the Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999. In this
direction, a significant step has been taken with
operationalization of a new Overseas Investment
regime. Foreign Exchange Management
(Overseas Investment) Rules, 2022 have been
notified by the Central Government on August
22, 2022.

The purpose of the lesson is to familiarize the
students with:
                                                                                    ? Setting up of
                                                                  ? Foreign         Subsidiary/Joint
                                                                  currency          Venture/Branch ? Filing of
                                                    ? ODI Policy; remittances;      Office abroad; various returns.
Lesson 4 - External Commercial borrowings
(ECb)
External Commercial Borrowings are commercial
loans raised by eligible resident entities from
recognized non- resident entities and should
conform to parameters such as minimum
maturity, permitted and non- permitted end-uses,
maximum all-in-cost ceiling, etc. Transactions on
account of External Commercial Borrowings
(ECB) are governed by clause (d) of sub-section
3 of section 6 of the Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999 (FEMA). However, ECB
framework is not applicable in respect of
investment in Non-convertible Debentures          ? Overview of
(NCDs) in India made by Registered Foreign        ECB, Tracks                                      ? Procedure for
Portfolio Investors (RFPIs). The objective of the of ECB and ? Routes available ? Parking of       raising ECB;
lesson is to familiarize the students with:       kinds of ECB; for raising ECB; ECB;              and
                                                     ? Reporting
                                                     Requirements
                                                     and filing of
                                                     returns i.e. In
                                                     case of
                                                     Changes in
                                                     terms and
                                                     conditions of
                                                     ECB,
                                                     Conversion of
                                                     ECB into
                                                     equity etc.
Lesson 5 - Foreign Trade Policy & Procedure
The Foreign Trade Policy as notified by Central
Government seeks to provide a stable and
sustainable policy environment for foreign trade
in merchandise and services. India's Foreign
Trade Policy (FTP) has, conventionally, been
formulated for five years at a time and reviewed
annually. The focus of the FTP has been to
provide a framework of rules and procedures for
exports and imports and a set of incentives for
promoting exports.
The objective of the lesson is to facilitate the
students to acquaint with:
                                                                   Importer-Exporter
                                                                   Code (IEC)
* Legal Basis of the Foreign Trade Policy;           ?             Number;
                                                                   Remission of
                                                                   Duties or Taxes                           Quality
                                                                   on Export              Duty exemption     Complaints       Concept of
* Required Documents for Export/Import of                          Products Scheme        / remission        and Trade        Deemed
Goods From/into India;                            ?                (RoDTEP);       ?      schemes;       ?   Disputes; ?      Exports.
Lesson 6 - Law relating to Special Economic
Zones
Special Economic Zone (SEZ) is a specifically
delineated duty free enclave and shall be
deemed to be foreign territory for the purposes
of trade operations and duties and tariffs. Goods
and services going into the SEZ area from
Domestic Tariff Area treated as exports and
goods coming from the SEZ area into DTA
treated as if these are being imported.
Special Economic Zone Act, 2005 to provide for
the establishment, development and
management of the Special Economic Zones for
the promotion of exports and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto. SEZ
Rules, 2006 authorizes company secretaries to
appear before Board of Approval constituted
under Section 8 of the Act.
The purpose of this lesson is to provide the
students with:
                                                                                                                              Special
                                                                   Establishment of       Approval and                        Economic
                                                                   Special Economic       Authorization to   Setting up       Zone
                                                      ?            Zones;           ?     Operate SEZ; ?     of Unit; and ?   Authority.
Lesson 7 - Law relating to Foreign Contribution
Regulation
Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010
regulate the acceptance and utilisation of foreign
contribution or foreign hospitality by certain
individuals or associations or companies and to
prohibit acceptance and utilisation of foreign
contribution or foreign hospitality for any
activities detrimental to the national interest and
for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto. The Act mandates that every bank or
authorized person in foreign exchange shall
report to specified authority, the prescribed
amount of foreign remittance, source and
manner in which foreign remittance was received
and other particulars.
It is expected that, at the end of this lesson,
students will, inter alia, be in a position to
understand the:
* Regulation of foreign contribution, foreign                      Eligible contributor
Source and foreign hospitality;                       ?            & eligible receiver;
* Accounts, Intimation, Audit and Disposal of                      Offences and
Assets; and                                           ?            Penalities.
Lesson 8 - Prevention of Money Laundering
The possible social and political costs of money
laundering, if left unchecked or dealt with
ineffectively, are serious. Organized crime can
infiltrate financial institutions, acquire control of
large sectors of the economy through
investment, or offer bribes to public officials and
indeed governments. The economic and political
influence of criminal organizations can weaken
the social fabric, collective ethical standards, and
ultimately the democratic institutions of society.
In countries transitioning to democratic systems,
this criminal influence can undermine the
transition. Most fundamentally, money
laundering is inextricably linked to the underlying
criminal activity that generated it. Laundering
enables criminal activity to continue.
The Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002
enacted to prevent money laundering and to
provide for confiscation of property derived from,
or involved in, money laundering and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
The objective of the lesson is to introduce the
students regarding:
                                                                                          Offence of
                                                                                          money              Attachment,
                                                                   Process and            laundering and     adjudication
* Problem and adverse effect of money                              Methods of money       its adverse        and
laundering;                                          ?             laundering;      ?     effect;        ?   confiscation;
* Obligation of Banking Companies, Financial                       Enforcement            Concept of
Institutions and Intermediaries;                     ?             Directorate; and ?     KYC and FIU.
Lesson 9 - Laws relating to Fugitive Economic
Offenders
There have been several instances of economic
offenders fleeing the jurisdiction of Indian courts
anticipating the commencement of criminal
proceedings or sometimes during the pendency
of such proceedings. The absence of such
offenders from Indian courts has several
deleterious consequences, such as, it obstructs
investigation in criminal cases, it wastes
precious time of courts and it undermines the
rule of law in India. Further, most of such cases
of economic offences involve non-repayment of
bank loans thereby worsening the financial
health of the banking sector in India. The
existing civil and criminal provisions in law are
inadequate to deal with the severity of the
problem. In order to address the said problem
and lay down measures to deter economic
offenders from evading the process of Indian law
by remaining outside the jurisdiction of Indian
courts, Parliament enacted a legislation, namely,
the Fugitive Economic Offenders Act, 2018 to
ensure that fugitive economic offenders return to
India to face the action in accordance with law.
It is expected that, at the end of this lesson,
students will, inter alia, be in a position to
understand the:
                                                            Procedure for                            Powers of        Power of
                                                            declaration of                           Director and     survey,
                                                            fugitive economic     Attachment of      other            search and
                                                        ?   offender;         ?   property;     ?    officers;    ?   seizure.
Lesson 10 - Law relating to benami Transactions
& Prohibition
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988
defines benami transaction and benami property
and also provides for exclusions and
transactions which shall not be construed
benami. The legislation is also intended to
effectively prohibit benami transactions and
consequently prevent circumvention of law
through unfair practices.


Lesson 13 - Legal Metrology
The branch of knowledge concerning weights
and measures is technically known as legal
metrology. In basic form, metrology is the
science of measurement. Legal metrology Act,
2009 intend to establish and enforce standards
of weights and measures, regulate trade and
commerce in weights, measures and other
goods which are sold or distributed by weight,
measure or number and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
                                                                                  Power of
The objective of the lesson is to introduce the             Standard weights      inspection,
students regarding:                                     ?   and measures;    ?    seizure;
                                                            Declarations on
                                                            pre-packaged          Offences and
                                                        ?   commodities; and ?    penalties.
Lesson 14 - Real Estate Regulation and
Development Law
Parliament enacted the Real Estate (Regulation
and Development) Act, 2016 which aims at
protecting the rights and interests of consumers
and promotion of uniformity and standardization
of business practices and transactions in the real
estate sector. It attempts to balance the interests
of consumers and promoters by imposing certain
responsibilities on both. It seeks to establish
symmetry of information between the promoter
and purchaser, transparency of contractual
conditions, set minimum standards of
accountability and a fast- track dispute resolution
mechanism.
As per Section 56 of the Act, the applicant or
appellant may either appear in person or
authorize one or more chartered accountants or
company secretaries or cost accountants or legal
practitioners or any of its officers to present his
or its case before the Appellate Tribunal or the
Regulatory Authority or the adjudicating officer,
as the case may be.
The objective of the lesson is to introduce the
students regarding:
                                                                                                                                                       Offences,
                                                                                                                                                       Penalties
                                                                                                                                       The Real        and
                                                            Registration of                          Real Estate      Central          Estate          adjudication
                                                            Real Estate           Real Estate        Regulatory       Advisory         Appellate       under the
                                                        ?   Project;          ?   Agents;        ?   Authority; ?     Council;     ?   Tribunal; and ? Act.
PART II- INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAWS
Lesson 15 - Intellectual Property Rights
Intellectual property is a vital component of
economic growth and a tool for corporate
competitiveness in today's highly competitive
global market. Intellectual property rights serve
as a catalyst for the development of innovations
and inventions. Ideas, innovations, and creative
expressions on the basis of which there is a
public desire to grant the status of property are
referred to as intellectual property rights (IPR). In
order for the inventors or developers of that
property to profit commercially from their creative
efforts or reputation, IPR grant them specific
exclusive rights. There are various forms of
intellectual property protection, including
trademark, copyright, and patent.
The objective of this lesson is to acclimatize
student with:
                                                    ?
                                                    International
                                                    legal
                                                    framework for
                                                    IPR such as
                                                    General
                                                    Agreement on
                                                    Trade in
                                                    Services
                                                    (GATS),
                                                    World
                                                    Intellectual
                                                    Property
                                                    Organization
                                                    (WIPO),
                                                    Trade-
                                                    Related
                                                    Aspects of
                                                    Intellectual
                                                    Property
                                                    Rights
                                                    (TRIPS),
* The basics of Intellectual Property Rights, their international
purpose, need, scope, regulatory framework;         conventions;
* India's National Intellectual Property Rights
Policy, its coverage and goals.
Lesson 16 - Law relating to Patents
With increase in the technological progress of
India, the patents are given to promote
innovations & developments and to ensure that
these creations got recognition commercially
without delay; and patents are conceded to
empower patentee to commercially utilize the
monopoly for the importation of the patented
product into the nation. Patent is a monopoly
grant and it enables the inventor to control the
output and within the limits set by demand, the
price of the patented products. A Patent is a
statutory right for an invention granted for a
limited period of time to the patentee by the
Government, in exchange of full disclosure of his
invention for excluding others, from making,
using, selling, importing the patented product or
process for producing that product for those
purposes without his consent.
The objective of this lesson is to facilitate the
students to get acquainted with:
* Concept of Patents, its infringement, duration,
inventions, what does not fall under purview of
inventions etc.;
* Patent Cooperation Treaty;
* Practical aspects relating to the process of
registration, termination, revocation, withdrawal
of patent application.
Lesson 17 - Law relating to Trade Marks
In view of developments in trading and
commercial practices, increasing globalisation of
trade and industry, the need to encourage
investment flows and transfer of technology,
need for simplification and harmonization of
trade mark management systems and to give
effect to important judicial decisions, a new
Trade Marks Act, 1999 have been enacted. It
aims to provide for registration of trade mark for
goods as well as services including prohibition to
the registration of imitation of well-known
trademarks, and expansion of grounds for
refusal of registration. A Trade Mark
distinguishes the goods of one manufacturer or
trader from similar goods of others and therefore,
it seeks to protect the interest of the consumer
as well as the trader.
The objective of this lesson is to familiarize
students with:
                                                                  Key concepts                                                 Law
                                                                  such as Trade                              Infringement      governing
                                                                  Marks, Well             The process of     of                the
                                                                  Known Trade             application,       trademark,        trademark
                                                                  Mark, Certification     withdrawal of      Passing Off,      and its
                                                                  Trade Mark              trademark          Effect of         application
                                                    ?             among others;       ?   application;   ?   registration; ?   in India.
Lesson 18 - Law relating to Copyright
In view of technological advancements in recent
times, copyright protection has been expanded
considerably. Copyright is a well-recognised form
of property right which had its roots in the
common law system and subsequently came to
be governed by the national laws in each
country. Today, copyright law has extended
protection not only to literary, dramatic, musical
and artistic works but also sound recordings,
films, broadcasts, cable programmes and
typographical arrangements of publications.
Computer programs have also been brought
within the purview of copyright law. The
copyright law deals with the particular forms of
creativity, concerned primarily with mass
communication. It is also concerned with virtually
all forms and methods of public communication,
not only printed publications but also with such
matters as sound, and television broadcasting,
films for public exhibition etc. and even
computerised systems for the storage and
retrieval of information.
The purpose of this lesson is to help students
understand the:
* Key concepts such as Copyright, Adaptations,
Author, what all is covered under copyright law,
works in which copyright subsists;
                                                                  Copyright, its
                                                                  meaning, term,
                                                                  assignment,
                                                                  infringement,
                                                                  registration
* The object, purpose, need and scope of                          process and its
copyright law in India;                             ?             licensing.
Lesson 19 - Law relating to geographical
Indications of goods
Every region has its claim to fame. Each fame
and reputation was carefully built up and
painstakingly maintained by the masters of that
region, combining the best of nature, man and
traditionally handed over from one generation to
the next for centuries. Gradually, a specific link
between the goods and place of production
evolved resulting in growth of geographical
indications. Geographical Indications of Goods
are that aspect of industrial property which refers
to a country or to a place situated therein as
being the country or place of origin of that
product. These identifications became so
important that these regions started specializing
in producing these unique products. Rising
demand for such products among the
consumers, gave rise for counterfeit products,
which began to tarnish the image of genuine
products. A effort to safeguard the interest of the
producers and consumers led to evolution and
conceptualization of "Geographical Indications".
The objective of this lesson is to familiarize
students with:
                                                      ? Regulatory
                                                      framework
                                                      governing the
                                                      Law of
                                                      Geographical
                                                      Indications of
                                                      Goods in
                                                      India and
                                                      important
* Key concepts such as Geographical                   concepts
Indications, duration, infringement of the same       related
among others;                                         thereto;
* Practical aspects relating to Step by Step
Guide on Geographical Indication of Goods
Registration Process in India.
Lesson 20 - Law relating to Designs
Design is one of the categories of IPR where the
design system focuses on the aesthetic feature
of an article derived from its visual appearance.
Relevant aspects are the shape, configuration,
surface pattern, the colour or line or a
combination thereof as applied to an article
which produces an aesthetic impression on the
sense of sight. The objective of the Designs Act,
2000 is to protect new or original designs so
created to be applied or applicable to particular
article to be manufactured by Industrial Process
or means. Sometimes purchase of articles for
use is influenced not only by their practical
efficiency but also by their appearance. The
important purpose of design registration is to see
that the artisan, creator, originator of a design
having aesthetic look is not deprived of his
bonafide reward by others applying it to their
goods.
The purpose of this lesson is to help students
understand the:
* Concept of Design, its duration, infringement
and publication;
                                                                       Practical aspects
                                                                       relating to Step by
* Regulatory framework governing the Law of                            Step Guide on
Design in India and important concepts related                         registration of
thereto;                                              ?                design in India.




INDEX
LESSON
NAME
PAGE NO.
                                                 1
LAW RELATING FOREIGN EXCHANGE
MANAGE
1.1 - 1.30
                                                 2
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENTS -
REGULATIONS & FDI POLICY
2.1 - 2.29
                                                 3
OVERSEAS DIRECT INVESTMENT
3.1 - 3.9
                                                 4
EXTERNAL COMMERCIAL BORROWING
4.1 - 4.14
                                   5
FOREIGN TRADE POLICY AND PROCEDURE
5.1 - 5.17
                                   6
LAW RELATING TO SPECIAL ECONOMIC
ZONES
6.1 - 6.9
                                   7
LAW RELATING TO FOREIGN
CONTRIBUTION REGULATION
7.1 - 7.10
                                   8
PREVENTION OF MONEY LAUNDERING ACT
8.1 - 8.13
                                   9
LAW RELATING TO FUGITIVE ECONOMIC
OFFENDERS
9.1 - 9.6
                                  10
LAW RELATING TO BENAMI TRANSACTIONS
& PROHIBITION
10.1 - 10.9
                                  11
COMPETITION LAW
11.1 - 11.18
                                  12
CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT
12.1 - 12.34
                                  13
LEGAL METROLOGY ACT, 2009
13.1 - 13.4
                                                14
REAL ESTATE (REGULATION AND
DEVELOPMENT) ACT,2016
14.1 - 14.16
                                                15
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
15.1 - 15.10
                                                16
LAW RELATING TO PATENTS
16.1 - 16.16
                                                17
LAW RELATING TO TRADE MARKS
17.1 - 17.14
                                                18
LAW RELATING TO COPYRIGHT
18.1 - 18.13
                                                19
LAW RELATING TO GEOGRAPHICAL
INDICATIONS OF GOODS
19.1 - 19.4
                                                20
LAW RELATING TO DESIGNS
20.1 - 20.6




Lesson 1: Law relating Foreign Exchange
Manage
INTRODUCTION
* The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973
was reviewed in 1993 and several amendments
were enacted as part of the on-going process of
economic liberalisation relating to foreign
investments and foreign trade for closer
interaction with the world economy. At that
stage, the Central Government decided that a
further review of the Foreign Exchange
Regulation Act would be undertaken in the light
of subsequent developments and experience in
relation to foreign trade and investment.
* It was subsequently felt that a better course
would be to repeal the existing Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act and enact a new
legislation. Reserve Bank of India was
accordingly asked to undertake a fresh exercise
and suggest a new legislation.


IMPORTANT DEFINITIONS




a company,
a firm,
an association of persons or body of individuals
whether incorporated or not; any agency, office
or branch owned or controlled by such persons.
Even every artificial juridical person not falling
within the above definition has been treated as
person as per clause (u) of Section 2

Person Resident in
India [Section 2(v)]
The expression 'person resident in India' has
been defined to mean - (i) a person residing in
India for more than 182 days during the course
of the preceding financial year Except
1) any person who has gone out of India or who
stays outside India
for
a) taking up employment outside India, or
b) for carrying on outside India a business or
vocation. Or
c) person who stays outside India for any other
purpose in such circumstances as would indicate
his intention to stay outside
India for an uncertain period.

2) A person who has come to stay or stays in
India, in either case otherwise than-
a) for or taking up employment in India; or
b) for carrying on in India a business or vocation
in India; or (c) for any other purpose, in such
circumstances as would indicate his intention to
stay in India for an uncertain period.

(ii) any person or body corporate registered or
incorporated in India.
(iii) an office, branch or agency in India owned or
controlled by a person resident out of India.
(iv) an office, branch or agency outside India
owned or controlled by a person resident in
India.


Repatriate to India 'Repatriate to India' means
bringing into India the realised foreign
[Section2(y)] exchange and (i) the selling of such
foreign exchange to an authorised person in
India in exchange for rupees, or
(ii) the holding of realised amount in an account
with an authorised person in India to the extent
notified by the Reserve Bank, and includes use
of the realised amount for discharge of a debt or
liability denominated in foreign exchange and the
expression "repatriation" shall be construed
accordingly.

                                                      Director
                                                      'Special
                                                      Director
                                                      (Appeals)'
                                                      means an
                                                      officer
                                                      appointed
                                                      under section
Special                                               17.
(Appeals) [Section Section 17 empowers Central
Government which shall, by notification,
                                                    appoint one
                                                    or more
                                                    Special
                                                    Directors
                                                    (Appeals) to
                                                    hear appeals
2(zc)]                                              against
the orders of the Adjudicating Authorities under
this section and shall also specify in the said
notification the matter and places in relation to
which the Special Director (Appeals) may
exercise jurisdiction


AUTHORISED PERSON
* Authorised Person include an authorised
dealer, money charger, offshore banking unit or
any other person for the time being authorised to
deal in foreign exchange or foreign securities.
* Chapter III of the Act containing Sections 10-12
deals with the provisions relating to authorised
person.
* Section 10 deals with the procedure of
appointing authorised person by the Reserve
Bank,
* Section 11 specifies the powers of the RBI to
issue directions to authorised person ? Section
12 prescribes the power of the RBI to inspect
authorised person.
* An Authorised Dealer is any person specifically
authorized by the Reserve Bank under Section
10(1) of FEMA, 1999, to deal in foreign
exchange or foreign securities. Under Section
10, any person who has made an application to
the RBI may be authorised by it to act as an
authorised person to deal in foreign exchange or
in foreign securities as an authorised dealer,
money changer or offshore banking unit or in any
other manner as the RBI deem fit.
* This authorisation is in writing and subject to
the conditions laid down by the RBI.
* Normally, nationalised banks, leading non
nationalized banks and foreign banks are
appointed as authorized persons.
* Authorised persons are required to comply with
the directions of the Reserve Bank with regard to
his dealing in foreign exchange or foreign
security receipt with the previous permission of
the Reserve Bank.
* However authorised person are required not to
engage in any transaction involving any foreign
exchange or foreign security which is not in
conformity with the terms of his authorisation.
* Reserve Bank of India has been empowered to
revoke the authorisation granted to any person
at any time in the public interest. It may also
revoke the authorisation after giving an
opportunity, if the authorised person failed to
comply with the conditions subject to which the
authorisation was granted or contravened any of
the provisions of the Act, rules, notifications or
directions.

* An authorised person, before undertaking any
transaction on behalf of any person shall, require
that person to make such declaration and give
such information as will reasonably satisfy the
authorised person that the transaction will not
involve or is not intended to violate or contravene
any provisions of the Act, rules, notification or
directions.
* In case, the person refuses to comply with
such requirements or makes only unsatisfactory
compliances, the authorised person is duty
bound to refuse in writing to act on behalf of
such person in such transaction and report the
matter to Reserve Bank.
* Any person, other than an authorised person
who has acquired or purchased foreign
exchange for any purpose mentioned in the
declaration made by him to the authorised
person does not use it for such purpose, or does
not surrender it to authorised person within the
specified period, or uses the foreign exchange
for any other purpose, which is not permitted
under the provisions of the Act, such person
shall be deemed to have committed
contravention of the provisions of the Act

REGULATION AND MANAGEMENT OF
FOREIGN EXCHANGE

Except as otherwise provided in the Act, Rules
or Regulations or with the general or special
permission of the RBI, no person shall:
1. Deal in or transfer any foreign exchange or
foreign security to any person not being an
authorized person;
2. Make any payment to or for the credit of any
person resident outside India in any manner; 3.
Receive otherwise through an authorized person
any payment by order or on behalf of any person
resident outside India in any manner;
4. Enter into financial transaction in India as
consideration for acquisition or transfer of any
asset outside India by any person.

CURRECURRENT ACCOUNT
TRANSACTIONS

The term current account transaction has been
defined to mean
* a transaction other than a capital account
transaction and includes
* payments due in connection with foreign trade,
other current business, services and short term
banking and credit facilities in the ordinary
course of business;
* payments due as interest on loan and as net
income from investments;
* remittances for living expenses of parents,
spouse and children residing abroad and
* expenses in connection with foreign travel,
education and medical care of parents, spouse
and children.

Under the Act, freedom has been granted for
selling and drawing of foreign exchange to or
from an authorized person for undertaking
current account transactions. However, the
Central Government has been vested with
powers in consultation with Reserve Bank to
impose reasonable restrictions on current
account transactions.
The Central Government has framed Foreign
Exchange Management (Current Account
Transactions) Rules, 2000 dealing with various
aspects of current account transactions.

Example of Current Account
* payment towards private visits to any country;
* Gift or donation;
* Going abroad for employment;
* Emigration;
* Maintenance of close relatives abroad;
* Travel for o business, or o attending a
conference or o specialised training or
* for meeting expenses for meeting medical
expenses, or c
* heck-up abroad, or
* for accompanying as attendant to a patient
going abroad for medical treatment/ check-up;
* Expenses in connection with medical treatment
abroad;
* Studies abroad

Drawal : mean drawal of foreign exchange from
an authorised person and includes opening of
Letter of Credit or use of International Credit
Card or International Debit Card or ATM Card or
any other thing by whatever name called which
has the effect of creating foreign exchange
liability.

Prohibition on drawal of foreign exchange for
certain transactions

Prohibited Current Account Transactions: There
is prohibition of certain remittances, even if they
are current account transactions. Such
transactions are:
1. Transactions with Nepal /Bhutan
-Drawl of foreign exchange for travel in
Nepal/Bhutan is not permitted
-Transactions with a person resident in
Nepal/Bhutan cannot be made in foreign
exchange, unless permitted by RBI by a special
or general order.

2. Commission on exports to Joint
Venture/Wholly Owned Subsidiary abroad
Commission on exports made towards equity
investments in Joint Venture/Wholly Owned
Subsidiary abroad of Indian companies is not
permitted.
3. Call back Charges
Payment related to call back services of
telephone. In call back system, the party which is
receiving the telephone call makes payment of
telephone charges.
4. Lottery/ Races
-Remittance out of lottery winnings ;
-Remittance of income from racing/riding etc.;
-iii Remittance for purchase of lottery tickets,
banned magazine, etc.
5. Lottery tickets/Money circulation schemes
Some organizations advise individuals they
should arrange to remit some amount in US
dollars as fees. It has been clarified that
remittance for lottery like schemes functioning
under different names such as money circulation
scheme, remittance for purpose of securing
prize money, awards is prohibited.
6. Rupee State Credit Route
Payment of commission on exports under Rupee
State Credit Route, except commission upto 10
% of invoice value of exports of tea and tobacco.
7. Interest on fund in Non Residents special
rupee account


Prior approval of Reserve Bank for certain
transaction
Rule 5 of the Foreign Exchange Management
(Current Account Transactions) Amendment
Rules, 2015, governs every drawal of foreign
exchange for transactions included in Schedule
III.

1. Facilities for individuals
Individuals can avail of foreign exchange facility
for the following purposes within the limit of USD
2,50,000
India.
(ii) Gift or donation.
(iii) Going abroad for employment.
(iv) Emigration.
(v) Maintenance of close relatives abroad.
expenses for
abroad for medical treatment/ check-up.
(vii) Expenses in connection with medical
treatment abroad.
(viii) Studies abroad.
(ix) Any other current account transaction.




2. Facilities for persons other than individual
The following remittances by persons other than
individuals require prior approval of the Reserve
Bank of India.
(i) Donations exceeding one per cent. of their
foreign exchange earnings during the previous
three financial years or USD 5,000,000,
whichever is less, for- (a) creation of Chairs in
reputed educational institutes;
(b) contribution to funds (not being an
investment fund) promoted by educational
institutes; and (c) contribution to a technical
institution or body or association in the field of
activity of the donor
Company.
(ii) Commission, per transaction, to agents
abroad for sale of residential flats or commercial
plots in India exceeding USD 25,000 or five
percent of the inward remittance whichever is
more. (iii) Remittances exceeding USD
10,000,000 per project for any consultancy
services in respect any transaction which alters
the assets or liabilities including contingent
liabilities, outside India of persons resident in
India or
assets or liabilities in India of person resident
outside India and includes the transactions
specified in Section 6(3) of the Act.

Example
Indian Party making investment in equity
shares/capital contribution in a foreign entity, or
acquiring an immovable property outside India
and
a transaction which alters the assets or liabilities,
including contingent liabilities, outside India of
persons resident in India or assets or liabilities in
India of persons resident outside India.




Section 6 in The Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999.
6. Capital account transactions.-
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2),
any person may sell or draw foreign exchange to
or from an authorised person for a capital
account transaction. -(1) Subject to the
provisions of sub-section (2), any person may
sell or draw foreign exchange to or from an
authorised person for a capital account
transaction."
(2) The Reserve Bank may, in consultation with
the Central Government, specify-
(a) any class or classes of capital account
transactions which are permissible;
(b) the limit up to which foreign exchange shall
be admissible for such transactions: Provided
that the Reserve Bank shall not impose any
restriction on the drawal of foreign exchange for
payments due on account of amortization of
loans or for depreciation of direct investments in
the ordinary course of business.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the
provisions of sub-section (2), the Reserve Bank
may, by regulations, prohibit, restrict or regulate
the following:-
(a) transfer or issue of any foreign security by a
person resident in India;
(b) transfer or issue of any security by a person
resident outside India;
(c) transfer or issue of any security or foreign
security by any branch, office or agency in India
of a person resident outside India;
(d) any borrowing or lending in foreign exchange
in whatever form or by whatever name called; (e)
any borrowing or lending in rupees in whatever
form or by whatever name called between a
person resident in India and a person resident
outside India;
(f) deposits between persons resident in India
and persons resident outside India;
(g) export, import or holding of currency or
currency notes;
(h) transfer of immovable property outside India,
other than a lease not exceeding five years, by a
person resident in India;
(i) acquisition or transfer of immovable property
in India, other than a lease not exceeding five
years, by a person resident outside India;
(j) giving of a guarantee or surety in respect of
any debt, obligation or other liability incurred,- (i)
by a person resident in India and owed to a
person resident outside India; or (ii) by a person
resident outside India.
(4) A person resident in India may hold, own,
transfer or invest in foreign currency, foreign
security or any immovable property situated
outside India if such currency, security or
property was acquired, held or owned by such
person when he was resident outside India or
inherited from a person who was resident outside
India.
(5) A person resident outside India may hold,
own, transfer or invest in Indian currency,
security or any immovable property situated in
India if such currency, security or property was
acquired, held or owned by such person when
he was resident in India or inherited from a
person who was resident in India.
(6) Without prejudice to the provisions of this
section, the Reserve Bank may, by regulation,
prohibit, restrict, or regulate establishment in
India of a branch, office or other place of
business by a person resident outside India, for
carrying on any activity relating to such branch,
office or other place of business.




Permissible Capital Account Transactions by
Persons Resident in India




Permissible Capital Account Transactions by
Persons Resident Outside India




LIBERALISED REMITTANCE SCHEME (LRS)
Liberalised Remittance Scheme (LRS) of USD 2,
50,000 for resident individuals. Under the
Liberalised Remittance Scheme, Authorised
Dealers may freely allow remittances by resident
individuals up to USD 2, 50,000 per Financial
Year (April-March) for any permitted current or
capital account transaction or a combination of
both. The Scheme is not available to corporates,
partnership firms, HUF, Trusts, etc.

Release of foreign exchange exceeding USD
2,50,000, requires prior permission from the
Reserve Bank of India. a. Private visits
For private visits abroad, other than to Nepal and
Bhutan, any resident individual can obtain
foreign exchange up to an aggregate amount of
USD 2,50,000 from an Authorised Dealer or
FFMC, in any one financial year, irrespective of
the number of visits undertaken during the year.
b. Gift/donation
Any resident individual may remit up-to USD
2,50,000 in one FY as gift to a person residing
outside India or as donation to an organization
outside India. c. Going abroad on employment
A person going abroad for employment can draw
foreign exchange up to USD 2,50,000 per FY
from any
Authorised Dealer in India. d. Emigration
A person wanting to emigrate can draw foreign
exchange from AD Category I bank and AD
Category II up to the amount prescribed by the
country of emigration or USD 250,000.
Remittance of any amount of foreign exchange
outside India in excess of this limit may be
allowed only towards meeting incidental
expenses in the country of immigration and not
for earning points or credits to become eligible
for immigration by way of overseas investments
in government bonds; land; commercial
enterprise; etc.
e. Maintenance of relatives abroad
A resident individual can remit up-to USD
2,50,000 per FY towards maintenance of
relatives 'relative' as defined in Section 2(77) of
the Companies Act, 2013 abroad. f. Business trip
Visits by individuals in connection with attending
of an international conference, seminar,
specialised training, apprentice training, etc., are
treated as business visits. For business trips to
foreign countries, resident individuals can avail
of foreign exchange up to USD 2,50,000 in a FY
irrespective of the number of visits undertaken
during the year.
However, if an employee is being deputed by an
entity for any of the above and the expenses are
borne by the latter, such expenses shall be
treated as residual current account transactions
outside LRS and may be permitted by the AD
without any limit, subject to verifying the
bonafides of the transaction.
g. Medical treatment abroad
Authorised Dealers may release foreign
exchange up to an amount of USD 2,50,000 or
its equivalent per FY without insisting on any
estimate from a hospital/doctor. For amount
exceeding the above limit, Authorised Dealers
may release foreign exchange under general
permission based on the estimate from the
doctor in India or hospital/ doctor abroad. A
person who has fallen sick after proceeding
abroad may also be released foreign exchange
by an Authorised Dealer (without seeking prior
approval of the Reserve Bank of India) for
medical treatment outside India. In addition to
the above, an amount up to USD 250,000 per
financial year is allowed to a person for
accompanying as attendant to a patient going
abroad for medical treatment/check-up. h.
Facilities available to students for pursuing their
studies abroad.
AD Category I banks and AD Category II, may
release foreign exchange up to USD 2,50,000 or
its equivalent to resident individuals for studies
abroad without insisting on any estimate from
the foreign university. However, AD Category I
bank and AD Category II may allow remittances
(without seeking prior approval of the Reserve
Bank of India) exceeding USD 2,50,000 based
on the estimate received from the institution
abroad.
The permissible capital account transactions by
an individual under LRS are: i. opening of foreign
currency account abroad with a bank; ii.
acquisition of immovable property abroad,
Overseas Direct Investment (ODI) and Overseas
Portfolio Investment (OPI), in accordance with
the provisions contained in Foreign Exchange
Management (Overseas Investment) Rules,
2022, Foreign Exchange Management
(Overseas
Investment) Regulations, 2022 and Foreign
Exchange Management (Overseas Investment)
Directions, 2022;
iii. extending loans including loans in Indian
Rupees to Non-resident Indians (NRIs) who are
relatives as defined in Companies Act, 2013.


REALISATION, REPATRIATION AND
SURRENDER OF FOREIGN CURRENCY
Sec 8 ? person resident in India to make all
reasonable efforts to realise and repatriate the
foreign exchange due or accrued as per the
directions of the Reserve Bank.

Duty of persons to realise foreign exchange due
A person resident in India to whom any amount
of foreign exchange is due or has accrued shall
take all reasonable steps to realise and
repatriate to India such foreign exchange, and
shall in no case do or refrain from doing
anything, or take or refrain from taking any
action, which has the effect of securing -
(a) that the receipt by him of the whole or part of
that foreign exchange is delayed; or (b) that the
foreign exchange ceases in whole or in part to
be receivable by him.
It may be noted that 'Foreign exchange due'
means the amount which a person has a right to
receive or claim in foreign exchange.

Manner of Repatriation
On realisation of foreign exchange due, a person
shall repatriate the same to India, namely bring
into, or receive in, India and -
(a) sell it to an authorised person in India in
exchange for rupees; or
(b) retain or hold it in account with an authorised
dealer in India to the extent specified by the
Reserve Bank; or
(c) use it for discharge of a debt or liability
denominated in foreign exchange to the extent
and in the manner specified by the Reserve
Bank.
A person shall be deemed to have repatriated
the realised foreign exchange to India when he
receives in India payment in rupees from the
account of a bank or an exchange house
situated in any country outside India, maintained
with an authorised dealer.

Period for surrender of realised foreign
exchange
A person not being an individual resident in India
shall sell the realised foreign exchange to an
authorised person, within the period specified
below :-
(i) foreign exchange due or accrued as
remuneration for services rendered, whether in
or outside India, or in settlement of any lawful
obligation, or an income on assets held outside
India, or as inheritance, settlement or gift, within
seven days from the date of its receipt;
(ii) in all other cases within a period of ninety
days from the date of its receipt.




Period for surrender in certain cases
1) Any person not being an individual resident in
India who has acquired or purchased foreign
exchange for any purpose mentioned in the
declaration made by him to an authorised person
under Section 10(5) of the FEMA
 does not use it for such purpose or
 for any other purpose for which purchase or
acquisition of foreign exchange is permissible
under the provisions of the Act or the rules or
regulations or direction or order made
thereunder,
shall surrender such foreign exchange or the
unused portion thereof to an authorised person
within a period of 60 days from the date of its
acquisition or purchase by him

2) Where the foreign exchange acquired or
purchased by any person not being an individual
resident in India from an authorised person is for
the purpose of foreign travel, then, the unspent
balance of such foreign exchange shall, save as
otherwise provided in the regulations made
under the Act, be surrendered to an authorised
person
(i) within 90 days from the date of return of the
traveller to India, when the unspent foreign
exchange is in the form of currency notes and
coins; and
(ii) within 180 days from the date of return of the
traveller to India, when the unspent foreign
exchange is in the form of travellers cheques.

REMITTANCE OF ASSETS
Remittances by individuals not being NRIs/ PIOs
Remittance of assets' means remittance outside
India of funds representing a deposit with a bank
or a firm or a company of:
(i) provident fund balance
(ii) superannuation benefits
(iii) amount of claim or maturity proceeds of
Insurance policy
(iv) sale proceeds of shares, securities,
immovable property or any other asset held in
India

 ADs may allow remittance of assets by a
foreign national where:
i. the person has retired from employment in
India;
ii. the person has inherited from a person
referred to in section 6(5) of the Act; iii. the
person is a non-resident widow/widower and has
inherited assets from her/his deceased spouse
who was an Indian national resident in India.
iv. the remittance is in respect of balances held
in a bank account by a foreign student who has
completed his/ her studies, provided such
balance represents proceeds of remittances
received from abroad through normal banking
channels or rupee proceeds of foreign exchange
brought by such person and sold to an
authorised dealer or out of stipend/ scholarship
received from the Government or any
organisation in India.
 The remittance should not exceed USD one
million per financial year. This limit, however, will
not cover sale proceeds of assets held on
repatriation basis. In case the remittance is
made in more than one instalment, the
remittance of all instalments should be made
through the same AD on submission of
documentary evidence.
 These facilities are not available for citizens of
Nepal or Bhutan or a PIO.

Remittances by NRIs/ PIOs
ADs may allow NRIs/ PIOs, on submission of
documentary evidence, to remit up to USD one
million, per financial year:
i. out of balances in their non-resident (ordinary)
(NRO) accounts/ sale proceeds of assets/ assets
acquired in India by way of inheritance/ legacy;
ii. in respect of assets acquired under a deed of
settlement made by either of his/ her parents or
a relative as defined in Companies Act, 2013.
The settlement should take effect on the death of
the settler;
in case settlement is done without retaining any
life interest in the property i.e. during the lifetime
of the owner/ parent, it would be treated as
regular transfer by way of gift and the remittance
of sale proceeds of such property would be
guided by the extant instructions on remittance
of balance in the NRO account; iii. In case the
remittance is made in more than one instalment,
the remittance of all instalments should be made
through the same AD. Where the remittance is to
be made from the balances held in the NRO
account, the Authorised Dealer should obtain an
undertaking from the account holder stating that
the said remittance is sought to be made out of
the remitter's balances held in the account
arising from his/ her legitimate receivables in
India and not by borrowing from any other
person or a transfer from any other NRO account
and if such is found to be the case, the account
holder will render himself/ herself liable for penal
action under FEMA




Remittances by companies/ entities
ADs may allow remittances by Indian companies
under liquidation on directions issued by a Court
in India/ orders issued by official liquidator in
case of voluntary winding up on submission of:
(i) Auditor's certificate confirming that all liabilities
in India have been either fully paid or adequately
provided for.
(ii) Auditor's certificate to the effect that the
winding up is in accordance with the provisions
of the Companies Act.
(iii) In case of winding up otherwise than by a
court, an auditor's certificate to the effect that
there are no legal proceedings pending in any
court in India against the applicant or the
company under liquidation and there is no legal
impediment in permitting the remittance


Remittances/ winding up proceeds of branch/
office
ADs may permit remittance of assets on closure
or remittance of winding up proceeds of branch
office/ liaison office (other than project office) on
submission of the following documents:
(i) A copy of the Reserve Bank's permission for
establishing the branch/ office in India.
(ii) Auditor's certificate:
(a) indicating the manner in which the remittable
amount has been arrived and supported by a
statement of assets and liabilities of the
applicant, and indicating the manner of disposal
of assets;
(b) confirming that all liabilities in India including
arrears of gratuity and other benefits to the
employees etc., of the branch/ office have been
either fully met or adequately provided for;
(c) confirming that no income accruing from
sources outside India (including proceeds of
exports) has remained un-repatriated to India;
(d) confirming that the branch/office has
complied with all regulatory requirements
stipulated by the Reserve Bank of India from
time to time regarding functioning of such offices
in India;
(iii) a confirmation from the applicant that no
legal proceedings are pending in any Court in
India and there is no legal impediment to the
remittance; and
(iv) a report from the ROC regarding compliance
with the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013,
in case of winding up of the office in India.
Remittance of assets requiring RBI approval
Prior approval of the Reserve Bank is necessary
for remittance of assets where:
(a) Remittance is in excess of USD 1,000,000
(US Dollar One million only) per financial year
(i) on account of legacy, bequest or inheritance
to a citizen of foreign state, resident outside
India;
(ii) by NRIs/ PIOs out of the balances held in
NRO accounts/ sale proceeds of assets/ the
assets acquired by way of inheritance/ legacy.
(b) Hardship will be caused to a person if
remittance from India is not made to such a
person

Possession and retention of foreign exchange or
foreign coins
Foreign exchange can be possessed and
retained subject to the following limits :
1. Authorized person can retain or possess
foreign currency and coins within the scope of
his authority without any limit ;
2. Any person can possess foreign coins without
limit;
3. A person resident in India can retain foreign
exchange upto Us $2000 or its equivalent in
aggregate in the following cases:
i. Such foreign exchange have been acquired by
him while on a visit to any place out of India by
way of payment for services or by way of
honorarium or gift ;
ii. Such foreign exchange have been acquired by
him from any person resident outside India and
who is on a visit to India for services or by way of
honorarium or gift or in settlement of any lawful
obligation ;
iii. Such foreign exchange represents unspent
amount of foreign exchange acquired by him
from an authorized person for travel abroad.
4. A person resident in India but not permanently
resident in India may possess foreign exchange
without any limit if such foreign exchange was
acquired, held or owned by him when he was
resident outside India and has been brought into
India in accordance with the prescribed
regulations.


ACQUISITION OR TRANSFER OF
IMMOVABLE PROPERTY IN INDIA
As per section 6(5) of FEMA, a person resident
outside India can hold, own, transfer or invest in
any immovable property situated in India if such
property was acquired, held or owned by him/
her when he/ she was resident in India or
inherited from a person resident in India
-An NRI or an OCI can acquire by way of
purchase any immovable property (other than
agricultural land/ plantation property/ farm
house) in India.
-An NRI or an OCI can acquire by way of gift any
immovable property (other than agricultural land/
plantation property/ farm house) in India from
person resident in India or from an NRI or an
OCI who is a relative as defined in section 2(77)
of the Companies Act, 2013.
-An NRI or an OCI can acquire any immovable
property in India by way of inheritance from a
person resident outside India who had acquired
the property in accordance with the provisions of
the foreign exchange law in force at the time of
acquisition.
-An NRI or an OCI can acquire any immovable
property in India by way of inheritance from a
person resident in India.
-An NRI or an OCI may transfer any immovable
property in India to a person resident in India. -
An NRI or an OCI may transfer any immovable
property (other than agricultural land or
plantation property or farmhouse) to an NRI or
an OCI. In case the transfer is by way of gift, the
transferee should be a relative as defined in
section 2(77) of the Companies Act, 2013.

Power of the Reserve Bank to issue directions to
authorised person
 The RBI designs and implements the
regulatory policy framework for banking and non
banking financial institutions with the aim of
providing people access to the banking system,
protecting depositors' interest, and maintaining
the overall health of the financial system.
 RBI play an active role in balancing the
relationship between banks and customers;
focusing on financial inclusion; setting up
administrative machinery to handle customer
grievances; pursuing clean note policy and
ensuring development and oversight of secure
and robust payment and settlement systems
 Section 11 of the Act empowers the RBI to
issue directions to the authorised person in
regard to making of payment or doing or desist
from doing any act relating to foreign exchange
or foreign security.
 Reserve Bank has also been empowered to
issue directions to the authorised persons to
furnish such information in such manner as it
deems fit.
 If any authorised person contravenes any
direction given by the RBI or fails to file the
return as directed by RBI, he may be liable to a
fine not exceeding Rs. 10,000/- and in the case
of continuing contravention, with an additional
penalty which may extend to Rs. 2,000 for every
day during which such contravention continues.
Power of Reserve Bank to inspect authorised
person.
 Section 12 of the Act empowers RBI to inspect
the business of any authorised person for the
purpose of verifying the correctness of any
statement/information or particulars furnished.
 In case authorised person fails to furnish the
information sought, the RBI can initiate
inspection of the authorised person for obtaining
such information.
 RBI may also inspect the business of an
authorised person for securing compliance with
the provisions of the Foreign Exchange
Management Act or any of the Rules,
Regulations or directions.
 The Reserve Bank may make an order in
writing authorising any of its officer for this
purpose. When an inspection is initiated by the
Reserve Bank, it shall be the duty of every
authorised person to produce before the
inspecting officer, such books, accounts and
other documents in his custody within the time
limit and the manner in which such inspecting
officer may direct.

FUNCTIONS OF THE RBI
The main Functions of Reserve Bank of India
are as follows:
Monetary Authority:
?Formulates, implements and monitors the
monetary policy.
* Objective: maintaining price stability while
keeping in mind the objective of growth.

Regulator and Supervisor of the Financial
System:
?Prescribes broad parameters of banking
operations within which the country's banking
and financial system functions.
?Objective: maintain public confidence in the
system, protect depositors' interest and provide
cost effective banking services to the public.

Manager of Foreign Exchange:
* Manages the Foreign Exchange Management
Act, 1999.
?Objective: to facilitate external trade and
payment and promote orderly development and
maintenance of foreign exchange market in
India.

Issuer of Currency:
* Issues, exchanges and destroys currency
notes as well as puts into circulation coins
minted by Government of India.
?Objective: to give the public adequate quantity
of supplies of currency notes and coins and in
good quality.

Developmental Role:
?Performs a wide range of promotional functions
to support national objectives.


* The Reserve Bank of India performs the
supervisory function under the guidance of the
Board for Financial Supervision (BFS).
* The Board was constituted in November 1994
as a committee of the Central Board of Directors
of the Reserve Bank of India under the Reserve
Bank of India (Board for Financial Supervision)
Regulations, 1994.
* The primary objective of BFS is to undertake
consolidated supervision of the financial sector




Central Board of Director
The Reserve Bank's affairs are governed by a
Central Board of Directors.
The board is appointed by the Government of
India in keeping with the Reserve Bank of India
Act for a period of four years.
The Central Board shall consist of the following
Directors, namely:
a) A Governor and not more than 4 Deputy
Governors to be appointed by the Central
Government.
b) 4 Directors to be nominated by the Central
Government, 1 from each of the 4 Local Boards
c) 10 Directors to be nominated by the Central
Government.
d) 2 Government officials to be nominated by the
Central Government. Thus, Central Board
consists of total 21 persons.

ADJUDICATING AUTHORITIES
Section 16 of Foreign Exchange Management
Act, 1999 empowers the Central Govt. to appoint
Adjudicating Authorities. The Adjudicating
Authorities can hold enquiry only on receiving a
complaint in one year. If it is not possible, he
shall record the reasons for not disposing off the
complaint within 1 year.

The jurisdiction of various adjudicating
authorities is as follows
There are 3 levels of Adjudicating Authorities i.e.
Deputy Director, Additional Director and Director
of Directorate of Enforcement in the ascending
order of hierarchy.
The Assistance Director of Directorate of
Enforcement normally makes a complaint before
the
Adjudicating Authorities but sometimes he can
also act as Adjudicating Authority.

Special Director (Appeals)
Section 17 empowers the Central Govt. to
appoint one or more Special Director (Appeals)
to hear the appeals against the orders of
Adjudicating Authorities.
Special Director (Appeals) shall have the
jurisdiction to hear the appeals only against the
orders of Assistant Director and Deputy Director.
The appeal against the orders of Special
Director (Appeals) shall lie before Appellate
Tribunal for Foreign Exchange.

Appellate Tribunal for foreign exchange
Section 18 of Foreign Exchange Management
Act, 1999 empowers the Central Govt. establish
an Appellate Tribunal for Foreign Exchange to
hear appeals against the orders of Adjudicating
Authorities (i.e. Additional Director and Director
of Directorate of Enforcement) and Special
Director (Appeals).
* The appeal against the orders of Appellate
Tribunal shall lie before the High Court.
* The Appellate Tribunal consists of a
Chairperson and other members.
* A person qualified to be a Judge of a High
Court shall be appointed as the Chairperson and
* A person qualified to be a judge of a District
Court shall be appointed as the member of the
Appellate Tribunal
* Appointment shall be for a period of 5 years




Appeal against the orders of Appeallate Tribunal
to High Court
 Before making an appeal against the orders of
Appellate Tribunal for foreign exchange, it must
be kept in mind that such appeal can be made
only on questions of law and not on questions of
facts.
 Any person aggrieved by an order of the
Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal within 60
days from the date of communication of the
order of the Appellate Tribunal, to the concerned
High court.

Directorate of Enforcement
 Section 36 of the Act empowers the Central
Government to establish a Directorate of
Enforcement with a Director and other officers or
class of Officers, for the purposes of the
enforcement of the Act.
 The Central Government has also been
empowered to authorise Director, Additional
Director,
Special Director or Deputy Director to appoint
officers of enforcement below the rank of
Assistant Director of Enforcement to exercise
the powers and discharge the duties conferred or
imposed on him under the Act.
 The Central Government, may, by order and
with prescribed conditions and limitations,
authorise any officers of customs or Central
Excise or any police officer or officers of Central
or State Government to exercise such powers
and discharge such duties of the Director of
Enforcement or any other officer of the
Enforcement as stated in the order.

Investigation
 Section 37 of the Act empowers the Director of
Enforcement and other officers below the rank of
an Assistant Director to take up for investigation
the contravention referred to in Section 13 of the
Act.
 In addition, the Central Government may also
authorise any officer or class of officers in the
Central Government, State Government,
Reserve Bank of India, not below the rank of
Under Secretary to Government of India, to
investigate any contravention under Section 13
of the Act.
 The officers so appointed shall exercise the like
powers which are conferred on income tax
authorities under the Income Tax Act, 1961,
subject to such conditions and limitations as laid
down under that Act.

Contravention by Companies
 Section 42 of the Act provides that where the
person committing the contravention of the Act
or Rules happened to be a company, every
person who at the time the contravention was
committed, was in charge of and was
responsible to the company for the conduct of
the business of the company shall be deemed to
be guilty of the contravention and liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
 However, no such persons shall be deemed to
be guilty of committing any offence if he proves
that such contravention took place without his
knowledge or that he exercised adequate steps
to prevent such contravention.
 In case the contravention is committed by a
company and it is proved that such
contravention is committed with the knowledge,
consent and connivance or is attributed to the
neglect on the part of any director, manager or
secretary or other officer of the company, they
will also be deemed to be guilty of contravention
and liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.


COMPOUNDING OF OFFENCES
 Compounding refers to the process of
voluntarily admitting the contravention, pleading
guilty and seeking redressal.
 The Reserve Bank is empowered to compound
any contraventions as defined under section 13
of FEMA, 1999 except the contravention under
section 3(a), for a specified sum after offering an
opportunity of personal hearing to the
contravener.
 Willful, malafide and fraudulent transactions
are, however, viewed seriously, which will not be
compounded by the Reserve Bank.
 Any person who contravenes any provision of
the FEMA, 1999 [except section 3(a)] or
contravenes any rule, regulation, notification,
direction or order issued in exercise of the
powers under this Act or contravenes any
condition subject to which an authorization is
issued by the Reserve Bank, can apply for
compounding to the Reserve Bank.
 Applications seeking compounding of
contraventions under section 3(a) of FEMA,
1999 may be submitted to the Directorate of
Enforcement.

Application for compounding Compou ding
 All applications for compounding may be
submitted together with the prescribed fee of
Rs.5000/- by way of a demand draft drawn in
favour of "Reserve Bank of India" and payable at
the concerned Regional Office.
 Along with the application, the applicant may
also furnish
* the details relating to FDI, ECB, Overseas
Direct Investment and Branch Office / Liaison
Office, as applicable,
* a copy of the Memorandum of Association and
* latest audited balance sheet along with an
undertaking that they are not under investigation
of any agency such as DOE, CBI, etc. in order to
complete the compounding process within the
time frame.
 In case the application has to be returned
where required approvals are not obtained from
the authorities concerned or in case of
incomplete application for any other reason, the
application fees of Rs.5000/- received along with
the application will be returned by crediting the
same to the applicant's account through NEFT
as per the ECS mandate and details of their
bank account as furnished along with the
application. The application will be treated as
incomplete without these details.

Pre-requisite for Compounding Process
 In respect of a contravention committed by any
person within 3 years from the date on which a
similar contravention committed by him was
compounded under the Compounding Rules,
such contraventions would not be compounded
and relevant provisions of the FEMA, 1999 shall
apply. Any second or subsequent contravention
committed after the expiry of 3 years from the
date on which the contravention was previously
compounded shall be deemed to be a first
contravention.
 Contraventions relating to any transaction
where proper approvals or permission from the
Government or any statutory authority
concerned, as the case may be, have not been
obtained such contraventions would not be
compounded unless the required approvals are
obtained from the concerned authorities.

 Cases of contravention such as those having a
money laundering angle, national security
concerns and/or involving serious infringements
of the regulatory framework or where the
contravener fails to pay the sum for which
contravention was compounded within the
specified period in terms of the compounding
order, shall be referred to the Directorate of
Enforcement for further investigation.
 Whenever a contravention is identified by the
Reserve Bank or brought to its notice by the
entity involved in contravention by way of a
reference other than through the prescribed
application for compounding, the Bank will
continue to decide
* whether a contravention is technical and/or
minor in nature and, as such, can be dealt with
by way of an administrative/ cautionary advice;
* whether it is material and, hence, is required to
be compounded for which the necessary
compounding procedure has to be followed or
* whether the issues involved are sensitive /
serious in nature and, therefore, need to be
referred to the Directorate of Enforcement
(DOE).
However, once a compounding application is
filed by the concerned entity suo moto, admitting
the contravention, the same will not be
considered as 'technical' or 'minor' in nature and
the compounding process shall be initiated.

Scope and Procedure for Compounding
 On receipt of the application for compounding,
the Reserve Bank shall examine the application
based on the documents and submissions made
in the application and assess whether
contravention is quantifiable and, if so, the
amount of contravention.
 The Compounding Authority may call for any
information, record or any other documents
relevant to the compounding proceedings. In
case the contravener fails to submit the
additional information/documents called for
within the specified period, the application for
compounding will be liable for rejection.
 The following factors, which are only indicative,
may be taken into consideration for the purpose
of passing compounding order and adjudging the
quantum of sum on payment of which
contravention shall be compounded:
* the amount of gain of unfair advantage,
wherever quantifiable, made as a result of the
contravention;
* the amount of loss caused to any authority/
agency/ exchequer as a result of the
contravention; ? economic benefits accruing to
the contravener from delayed compliance or
compliance avoided;
* the repetitive nature of the contravention, the
track record and/or history of non-compliance of
the contravener;
* contravener's conduct in undertaking the
transaction and in disclosure of full facts in the
application and submissions made during the
personal hearing; and any other factor as
considered relevant and appropriate.

Issue of the Compounding Order
 The Compounding Authority shall pass an
order of compounding after affording an
opportunity of being heard to all the concerned
as expeditiously as possible as and not later
than 180 days from the date of application. The
time limit for this purpose would be reckoned
from the date of receipt of the completed
application for compounding by the Reserve
Bank.
 The Compounding Order shall specify the
provisions of the FEMA, 1999 or any rule,
regulation, notification, direction or order issued
in exercise of the powers under FEMA, 1999 in
respect of which contravention has taken place
along with details of the contravention.
 One copy of the compounding order shall be
supplied to the applicant (the contravener) and
also to the Adjudicating Authority, where the
compounding of any contravention is made after
making of a complaint.
 To ensure more transparency and greater
disclosure, it has been decided to host the
compounding orders passed on the Reserve
Bank's website (www.rbi.org.in).




Lesson 2. Foreign Direct Investments -
Regulations & FDI Policy
Introduction

Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) ?
* an investment in one country from another
country in any types of business entities.
* it provides a situation where in both the host
and the home nations derive some benefit.
* FDI flows into India have grown consistently
since liberalization and are an important
component of foreign capital
* It is the intent and objective of the Government
of India to attract and promote FDI in order to
supplement domestic capital, technology and
skills for accelerated economic growth and
development.
?
investor.

Any investment in any business entities in India
from other country shall be known as Foreign
Direct Investment in India.

Depository Receipt ? (DR) means a negotiable
security issued outside India by a Depository
bank, on behalf of an Indian company, which
represent the local Rupee denominated equity
shares of the company held as deposit by a
Custodian bank in India
Domestic Custodian' ?means a custodian of
securities registered with the SEBI in
accordance with the SEBI (Custodian of
Securities) Regulations, 1996.

Domestic Depository'? means a custodian of
securities registered with the SEBI and
authorised by the issuing entity to issue Indian
depository receipts.

Erstwhile Overseas Corporate Body'(OCB)?
means a company, partnership firm, society and
other corporate body owned directly or indirectly
to the extent of at least sixty percent by
nonresident Indians and includes overseas trust
in which not less than sixty percent beneficial
interest is held by non-resident Indians directly or
indirectly but irrevocably and which was in
existence on the date of commencement of the
Foreign Exchange Management (Withdrawal of
General Permission to Overseas Corporate
Bodies (OCBs) Regulations, 2003 and
immediately prior to such commencement was
eligible to undertake transactions pursuant to the
general permission granted under the
regulations under FEMA.

Foreign Currency Convertible Bond ? 'Foreign
Currency Convertible Bond' (FCCB) means a
bond issued by an Indian company expressed in
foreign currency, the principal and interest of
which is payable in foreign currency.

Foreign Venture Capital Investor ? 'Foreign
Venture Capital Investor' (FVCI) means an
investor incorporated and established outside
India, which is registered under the Securities
and Exchange Board of India (Foreign Venture
Capital Investor) Regulations, 2000 {SEBI(FVCI)
Regulations} and proposes to make investment
in accordance with these Regulations. Indian
Venture Capital Undertaking ? 'Indian Venture
Capital Undertaking' (IVCU) means an Indian
company:
(i) Whose shares are not listed in a recognised
stock exchange in India;
(ii) Which is engaged in the business of
providing services, production or manufacture of
articles or things, but does not include such
activities or sectors which are specified in the
negative list by the SEBI, with approval of
Central Government, by notification in the
Official Gazette in this behalf.
Transferable Development Rights ?
'Transferable Development Rights' (TDR) means
certificates issued in respect of category of land
acquired for public purposes either by the
Central or State Government in consideration of
surrender of land by the owner without monetary
compensation, which are transferable in part or
whole.

Investment on repatriable basis' ? means
investment, the sale or maturity proceeds of
which, net of taxes, are eligible to be repatriated
out of India and the expression 'investment on
nonrepatriable basis' shall be construed
accordingly.




ELIGIBLE INVESTORS
1. (a) A non-resident entity can invest in India,
subject to the FDI Policy except in those
sectors/activities which are prohibited.
However, an entity of a country, which shares
land border with India or where the beneficial
owner of an investment into India is situated in
or is a citizen of any such country, can invest
only under the Government route.
Further, a citizen of Pakistan or an entity
incorporated in Pakistan can invest, only under
the Government route, in sectors/activities other
than defence, space, atomic energy and
sectors/activities prohibited for foreign
investment.

(b) In the event of the transfer of ownership of
any existing or future FDI in an entity in India,
directly or indirectly, resulting in the beneficial
ownership falling within the restriction/purview of
the para 1(a), such subsequent change in
beneficial ownership will also require
Government approval.

2. NRIs resident in Nepal and Bhutan as well as
citizens of Nepal and Bhutan are permitted to
invest in the capital of Indian companies on
repatriation basis, subject to the condition that
the amount of consideration for such investment
shall be paid only by way of inward remittance in
free foreign exchange through normal banking
channels.


3. OCBs have been derecognized as a class of
investors in India with effect from September 16,
2003. Erstwhile OCBs which are incorporated
outside India and are not under the adverse
notice of RBI can make fresh investments as
incorporated non-resident entities in accordance
with the
FDI Policy and Foreign Exchange Management
(Non-Debt Instrument) Rules, 2019.

4. A company, trust and partnership firm
incorporated outside India and owned and
controlled by NRIs can invest in India with the
special dispensation as available to NRIs under
the FDI Policy.

5. Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPI) may make
investments in the manner and subject to the
terms and conditions specified in Schedule II of
Foreign Exchange Management (Non-Debt
Instruments) Rules, 2019.

6. Registered FPIs and NRIs can invest/trade
through a registered broker in the capital of
Indian
Companies on recognised Indian Stock
Exchanges as per the applicable Schedule
under the Foreign Exchange Management (Non-
Debt Instruments) Rules, 2019, as amended
from time to time.

7. A Foreign Venture Capital Investor (FVCI)
may make investments in the manner and
subject to the terms and conditions specified in
Schedule VII of Foreign Exchange Management
(Non-
Debt Instruments) Rules, 2019.

8. An NRI or an OCI may subscribe to National
Pension System governed and administered by
Pension Fund Regulatory and Development
Authority (PFRDA), provided such subscriptions
are made through normal banking channels and
the person is eligible to invest as per the
provisions of the PFRDA Act. The annuity/
accumulated saving will be repatriable.


estate business or print media sector.
(c) Amount invested shall not be eligible for
repatriation outside India.
* Investments with repatriation option: NRIs may
seek prior permission of Reserve Bank for
investment in sole proprietorship
concerns/partnership firms with repatriation
option. The application will be decided in
consultation with the Government of India.
* Investment by non-residents other than NRIs: A
person resident outside India other than NRIs
may make an application and seek prior
approval of Reserve Bank for making investment
in the capital of a firm or a proprietorship concern
or any association of persons in India. The
application will be decided in consultation with
the Government of India.
* Restrictions: An NRI is not allowed to invest in
a firm or proprietorship concern engaged in any
agricultural/plantation activity or real estate
business or print media.
3. Trusts
Investment by a person resident outside India is
not permitted in Trusts other than in Venture
Capital Fund 'VCF' registered and regulated by
SEBI and 'Investment vehicle'.

4. Limited Liability Partnerships (LLPs)
Foreign Investment in LLPs is permitted subject
to the following conditions:
* Foreign Investment is permitted under the
automatic route in LLPs operating in sectors/
activities where 100% FDI is allowed through the
automatic route and there are no FDIlinked
performance conditions.
* An Indian company or an LLP, having foreign
investment, is also permitted to make
downstream investment in another company or
LLP in sectors in which 100% FDI is allowed
under the automatic route and there are no FDI
linked performance conditions.
* Conversion of an LLP having foreign
investment and operating in sectors/activities
where 100% FDI is allowed through the
automatic route.
* Similarly, A company can also be converted
having foreign investment and operating in
sectors/activities where 100% FDI is allowed
through the automatic route and there are no FDI
linked performance conditions.
* Foreign Investment in LLP is subject to the
compliance of the conditions of LLP Act, 2008.

5. Investment Vehicle
An entity being 'investment vehicle' registered
and regulated under relevant regulations framed
by SEBI or any other authority designated for the
purpose including
* Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs)
governed by the SEBI (REITs) Regulations,
2014,
* Infrastructure Investment Trusts (InvIts)
governed by the SEBI (InvIts) Regulations, 2014,
* Alternative Investment Funds (AIFs) governed
by the SEBI (AIFs) Regulations, 2012 is
permitted to receive foreign investment from a
person resident outside India (other than an
individual who is citizen of or any other entity
which is registered / incorporated in Pakistan or
Bangladesh)

6. Startup Companies
Start-ups can issue equity or equity linked
instruments or debt instruments to FVCI against
receipt of foreign remittance, as per Foreign
Exchange Management (Non-Debt Instruments)
Rules, 2019. In addition, start-ups can issue
convertible notes to person resident outside
India subject to the following conditions
(i) A person resident outside India (other than an
individual who is citizen of Pakistan or
Bangladesh or an entity which is
registered/incorporated in Pakistan or
Bangladesh), may purchase convertible notes
issued by an Indian startup company for an
amount of Rs. 25 lakhs or more in a single
tranche, without any approval.
(ii) For the purpose of this Regulation, a 'startup
company' means a private company
incorporated under the Companies Act, 2013 or
Companies Act,1956 and recognised as such by
the DPIIT, Ministry of Commerce and Industry.
(iii) A startup company engaged in a sector
where foreign investment requires Government
approval may issue convertible notes to a non-
resident only with approval of the Government.
(iv) The issue of shares against convertible
notes shall be in accordance with the Foreign
Exchange Management (Non-Debt Instruments)
Rules, 2019.
(v) A startup company issuing convertible notes
to a person resident outside India shall receive
the amount of consideration by inward
remittance through banking channels or by debit
to the NRE / FCNR (B) / Escrow account
maintained by the person concerned in
accordance with the Foreign Exchange
Management (Deposit) Regulations, 2016, as
amended from time to time.
Provided that an escrow account for the above
purpose shall be closed immediately after the
requirements are completed or within a period of
six months, whichever is earlier. However, in no
case continuance of such escrow account shall
be permitted beyond a period of six months.
(vi) NRIs may acquire convertible notes on non-
repatriation basis in accordance with Schedule
IV of the Foreign Exchange Management (Non-
Debt Instruments) Rules, 2019.
(vii) A person resident outside India may acquire
or transfer, convertible notes, by way of sale,
from or to, a person resident in or outside India,
provided the transfer takes place in accordance
applicable pricing guidelines under FEMA. Prior
approval from the Government shall be obtained
for such acquisitions or transfers in case the
startup company is engaged in a sector which
requires Government approval.
(viii) The startup company issuing convertible
notes shall be required to furnish reports as
prescribed by the RBI.

ENTRY ROUTES FOR INVESTMENT
Investments can be made by non-residents in
 equity shares
 fully, compulsorily and mandatorily convertible
debentures
 fully, compulsorily and mandatorily convertible
preference shares of an Indian company,
through the Automatic Route or the Government
Route.
Under the Automatic Route, the non-resident
investor or the Indian company does not require
any approval from Government of India for the
investment.
Under the Government Route, prior approval of
the Government of India is required.
Proposals for foreign investment under
Government Route, are considered by respective
Administrative Ministry/Department.

Foreign investment in sectors/activities under
government approval route will be subject to
government approval where:
(i) An Indian company is being established with
foreign investment and is not owned by a
resident entity or
(ii) An Indian company is being established with
foreign investment and is not controlled by a
resident entity or
(iii) The control of an existing Indian company,
currently owned or controlled by resident Indian
citizens and Indian companies, which are owned
or controlled by resident Indian citizens, will be/is
being transferred/ passed on to a non-resident
entity as a consequence of transfer of shares
and/or fresh issue of shares to nonresident
entities through amalgamation,
merger/demerger, acquisition etc. or ,
(iv) The ownership of an existing Indian
company, currently owned or controlled by
resident Indian citizens and Indian companies,
which are owned or controlled by resident Indian
citizens, will be/is being transferred/ passed on
to a non-resident entity as a consequence of
transfer of shares and/or fresh issue of shares to
nonresident entities through amalgamation,
merger/demerger, acquisition etc.
(v) It is clarified that foreign investment shall
include all types of foreign investments, direct
and indirect, regardless of whether the said
investments have been made under
Schedule I (FDI),
II (FPI),
III (NRI),
VI (LLPs),
VII (FVCI),
VIII(Investment Vehicles) and
IX (DRs) of Foreign Exchange Management
(Non-Debt Instruments) Rules, 2019. FCCBs
and DRs having underlying of instruments which
can be issued under Schedule IX, being in the
nature of debt, shall not be treated as foreign
investment. However, any equity holding by a
person resident outside India resulting from
conversion of any debt instrument under any
arrangement shall be reckoned as foreign
investment.
(vi) Investment by NRIs under Schedule IV of
Foreign Exchange Management (Non-Debt
Instruments) Rules, 2019 will be deemed to be
domestic investment at par with the investment
made by residents.
(vii) A company, trust and partnership firm
incorporated outside India and owned and
controlled by non-resident Indians will be eligible
for investments under Schedule IV of Foreign
Exchange Management (Non-Debt Instruments)
Rules, 2019 and such investment will also be
deemed domestic investment at par with the
investment made by residents.

CONDITIONS ON INVESTMENT BESIDES
ENTRY CONDITIONS.
1. Besides the entry conditions on foreign
investment, the investment/investors are
required to comply with all relevant sectoral
laws, regulations, rules, security conditions, and
state/local laws/regulations.
2. Establishment of branch office, liaison office or
project office or any other place of business in
India shall be governed by the Foreign
Exchange Management (Establishment in India
of a branch office or a liaison office or a project
office or any other place of business)
Regulations, 2016.
3. Acquisition or transfer of immovable property
in India by citizens of certain countries shall be
regulated as per the relevant provisions under
the Foreign Exchange Management
(Non-Debt Instruments) Rules, 2019, as
amended from time to time

FOREIGN INVESTMENT INTO/DOWNSTREAM
INVESTMENT BY ELIGIBLE INDIAN ENTITIES
Total Foreign Investment i.e. Direct and Indirect
Foreign Investment in eligible Indian entities
Investment in an eligible Indian entity can be
made both by non-resident as well as resident
Indian entities. Any non-resident investment in
an Indian company is direct foreign investment.
Investment by resident Indian entities could
again comprise of both resident and non-resident
investment. Thus, such an Indian company
would have indirect foreign investment if the
Indian investing company has foreign investment
in it. The indirect investment can also be a
cascading investment i.e. through multi-layered
structure.

* Downstream investment by an eligible Indian
entity, which is not owned and/or controlled by
resident entity(ies), into another Indian company,
would be in accordance/compliance with the
relevant sectoral conditions on entry route,
conditionalities and caps, with regard to the
sectors in which the latter Indian company is
operating
* Downstream investments by eligible Indian
entities/LLPs will be subject to the following
conditions

o Such an entity is required to notify its
downstream investment to RBI in Form DI as
well as on Foreign Investment Facilitation Portal
in the form available at www.fifp.gov.in within 30
days of such investment, even if capital
instruments have not been allotted along with the
modality of investment in new/existing ventures
o Downstream investment by way of induction of
foreign investment in an existing Indian
Company to be duly supported by a resolution of
the Board of Directors as also a share-holders
agreement, if any
o Issue/transfer/pricing/valuation of capital shall
be in accordance with applicable
FEMA/SEBI guidelines o the eligible Indian
entities making the downstream investments
would have to bring in requisite funds from
abroad and not leverage funds from the
domestic market

POHIBITED SECTORS
a) Lottery Business including
Government/private lottery, online lotteries, etc.
b) Gambling and Betting including casinos etc.
c) Chit funds
d) Nidhi company
e) Trading in Transferable Development Rights
(TDRs)

f) Real Estate Business or Construction of Farm
Houses
g) 'Real estate business' shall not include
development of townships, construction of
residential /commercial premises, roads or
bridges and Real Estate Investment Trusts
(REITs) registered and regulated under the SEBI
(REITs) Regulations 2014.
h) Manufacturing of cigars, cheroots, cigarillos
and cigarettes, of tobacco or of tobacco
substitutes

Activities/ sectors not open to private sector
investment e.g.(I) Atomic Energy and (II) Railway
operations (other than permitted activities).

Foreign technology collaboration in any form
including licensing for franchise, trademark,
brand name, management contract is also
prohibited for Lottery Business, Gambling and
Betting activities.




E-COMMERCE ACTIVITIES (100% of
Equity/FDI ? Automatic route)
Subject to provisions of FDI Policy, e-commerce
entities would engage only in Business to
Business (B2B) e-commerce and not in Business
to Consumer (B2C) e-commerce.
E-commerce- means buying and selling of goods
and services including digital products over
digital & electronic network
E-commerce entity- means a company
incorporated under the Companies Act 1956 or
the Companies Act 2013 or a foreign company
covered under section 2 (42) of the Companies
Act, 2013 or an office, branch or agency in India
as provided in section 2 (v) (iii) of FEMA 1999,
owned or controlled by a person resident outside
India and conducting the e-commerce business.
Inventory based model of e-commerce- means
an e-commerce activity where inventory of
goods and services is owned by e-commerce
entity and is sold to the consumers directly.
Marketplace based model of e-commerce-
means providing of an information technology
platform by an e-commerce entity on a digital &
electronic network to act as a facilitator between
buyer and seller.


Guidelines for Foreign Direct Investment on E-
Commerce Sector
(i) 100% FDI under automatic route is permitted
in marketplace model of e-commerce.
(ii) FDI is not permitted in inventory-based model
of e-commerce.
(iii) Digital & electronic network will include
network of computers, television channels and
any other internet application used in automated
manner such as web pages, extranets, mobiles
etc. (iv) Marketplace e-commerce entity will be
permitted to enter into transactions with sellers
registered on its platform on B2B basis.
(v) E-commerce marketplace may provide
support services to sellers in respect of
warehousing, logistics, order fulfillment, call
centre, payment collection and other services.

(vi) E-commerce entity providing a marketplace
will not exercise ownership or control over the
inventory i.e. goods purported to be sold. Such
an ownership or control over the inventory will
render the business into inventory-based model.
Inventory of a vendor will be deemed to be
controlled by e-commerce marketplace entity if
more than 25% of purchases of such vendor are
from the marketplace entity or its group
companies. (vii) In marketplace model
goods/services made available for sale
electronically on website should clearly provide
name, address and other contact details of the
seller. Post sales, delivery of goods to the
customers and customer satisfaction will be
responsibility of the seller.
(viii) In marketplace model, payments for sale
may be facilitated by the e-commerce entity in
conformity with the guidelines of the Reserve
Bank of India.
(ix) In marketplace model, any warrantee/
guarantee of goods and services sold will be
responsibility of the seller
(x) E-commerce marketplace entity will not
mandate any seller to sell any product
exclusively on its platform only

SINGLE BRAND PRODUCT RETAIL TRADING
(100% of Equity/FDI ? Automatic route)
(1) Foreign Investment in Single Brand product
retail trading is aimed at attracting investments in
production and marketing, improving the
availability of such goods for the consumer,
encouraging increased sourcing of goods from
India, and enhancing competitiveness of Indian
enterprises through access to global designs,
technologies and management practices.
(2) FDI in Single Brand product retail trading
would be subject to the following conditions:
(a) Products to be sold should be of a 'Single
Brand' only.
(b) Products should be sold under the same
brand internationally i.e. products should be sold
underthe same brand in one or more countries
other than India.
(c) 'Single Brand' product-retail trading would
cover only products which are branded during
manufacturing.
(d) A non-resident entity or entities, whether
owner of the brand or otherwise, shall be
permitted to undertake 'single brand' product
retail trading in the country for the specific brand,
either directly by the brand owner or through a
legally tenable agreement executed between the
Indian entity undertaking single brand retail
trading and the brand owner.

(e) In respect of proposals involving foreign
investment beyond 51%, sourcing of 30% of the
value of goods purchased, will be done from
India, preferably from MSMEs, village and
cottage industries, artisans and craftsmen, in all
sectors.

MULTI BRAND RETAIL TRADING (51% of
Equity/FDI ? Government route)
(1) FDI in multi brand retail trading, in all
products, will be permitted, subject to the
following conditions:
(i) Fresh agricultural produce, including fruits,
vegetables, flowers, grains, pulses, fresh poultry,
fishery and meat products, may be unbranded.
(ii) Minimum amount to be brought in, as FDI, by
the foreign investor, would be US $ 100 million.
(iii) At least 50% of total FDI brought in the first
tranche of US $ 100 million, shall be invested in
'back-end infrastructure' within three years,
where 'back-end infrastructure' will include
investment made towards processing,
manufacturing, distribution, design improvement,
quality control, packaging, logistics, storage,
ware-house, agriculture market produce
infrastructure etc. Expenditure on land cost and
rentals, if any, will not be counted for purposes
of backend infrastructure.
(iv) At least 30% of the value of procurement of
manufactured/processed products purchased
shall be sourced from Indian micro, small and
medium industries, which have a total investment
in plant & machinery not exceeding US $ 2.00
million
(v) Government will have the first right to
procurement of agricultural products
(vi) Retail trading, in any form, by means of e-
commerce, would not be permissible, for
companies with FDI, engaged in the activity of
multi-brand retail trading

Types of Instrument for FDI
1. Indian companies can issue
* equity shares,
* fully, compulsorily and mandatorily convertible
debentures and
* fully, compulsorily and mandatorily convertible
preference shares subject to pricing
guidelines/valuation norms prescribed under
FEMA Regulations.
The price at the time of conversion should not in
any case be lower than the fair value worked out,
at the time of issuance of such instruments, in
accordance with the extant FEMA
rules/regulations [as per any internationally
accepted pricing methodology on arm's length
basis for the unlisted companies and valuation in
terms of SEBI (ICDR) Regulations, for the listed
companies].
Optionality clauses are allowed in equity shares,
debentures and preference shares under FDI
scheme, subject to the following conditions:
(a) There is a minimum lock-in period of one
year which shall be effective from the date of
allotment of such capital instruments.
(b) After the lock-in period and subject to FDI
Policy provisions, if any, the non-resident
investor exercising option/right shall be eligible
to exit without any assured return, as per
pricing/valuation guidelines issued under FEMA
from time to time

2. Other types of Preference shares/Debentures
i.e. non-convertible, optionally convertible or
partially convertible for issue of which funds
have been received on or after May 1, 2007 are
considered as debt. Accordingly, all norms
applicable for ECBs relating to eligible
borrowers, recognized lenders, amount and
maturity, end-use stipulations, etc. shall apply.
Since these instruments would be denominated
in rupees, the rupee interest rate will be based
on the swap equivalent of London Interbank
Offered Rate (LIBOR) plus the spread as
permissible for ECBs of corresponding maturity.
3. The inward remittance received by the Indian
company vide issuance of DRs and FCCBs are
treated as FDI and counted towards FDI.

4. Acquisition of Warrants and Partly Paid
Shares - An Indian Company may issue warrants
and partly paid shares to a person resident
outside India subject to terms and conditions as
stipulated by the Reserve Bank of India in this
behalf, from time to time

5. Issue of Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds
(FCCBs) and Depository Receipts (DRs)
a) FCCBs/DRs may be issued in accordance
with the Scheme for issue of Foreign Currency
Convertible Bonds and Ordinary Shares
(Through Depository Receipt Mechanism)
Scheme, 1993 and DR Scheme 2014
respectively, as per the guidelines issued by the
Government of India there under from time to
time.
b) DRs are foreign currency denominated
instruments issued by a foreign Depository in a
permissible jurisdiction against a pool of
permissible securities issued or transferred to
that foreign depository and deposited with a
domestic custodian.
c) In terms of Foreign Exchange Management
(Non-Debt Instruments) Rules, 2019 as
amended from time to time, a person will be
eligible to issue or transfer eligible securities to a
foreign depository, for the purpose of converting
the securities so purchased into depository
receipts in terms of Depository Receipts
Scheme, 2014 and guidelines issued by the
Government of India thereunder from time to
time.
d) A person can issue DRs, if it is eligible to
issue eligible instruments to person resident
outside India under relevant Schedules under
Foreign Exchange Management (Non-Debt
Instruments) Rules, 2019, as amended from time
to time.
e) The aggregate of eligible securities which may
be issued or transferred to foreign depositories,
along with eligible securities already held by
persons resident outside India, shall not exceed
the limit on foreign holding of such eligible
securities under the relevant regulations framed
under FEMA, 1999.
f) The pricing of eligible securities to be issued or
transferred to a foreign depository for the
purpose of issuing depository receipts should not
be at a price less than the price applicable to a
corresponding mode of issue or transfer of such
securities to domestic investors under the
relevant regulations framed under FEMA, 1999.
g) The issue of depository receipts as per DR
Scheme 2014 shall be reported to the Reserve
Bank by the domestic custodian as per the
reporting guidelines for DR Scheme 2014.

6. (i) Two-way Fungibility Scheme: A limited two-
way Fungibility scheme has been put in place by
the Government of India for ADRs/GDRs. Under
this Scheme, a stock broker in India, registered
with SEBI, can purchase shares of an Indian
company from the market for conversion into
ADRs/GDRs based on instructions received from
overseas investors. Re-issuance of ADRs/GDRs
would be permitted to the extent of ADRs/GDRs
which have been redeemed into underlying
shares and sold in the Indian market.
(ii) Sponsored ADR/GDR issue: An Indian
Company can also sponsor an issue of
ADR/GDR. Under this mechanism, the company
offers its resident shareholders a choice to
submit their shares back to the company so that
on the basis of such shares, ADRs/GDRs can be
issued abroad. The proceeds of the ADR/GDR
issue are remitted back to India and distributed
among the resident investors who had offered
their Rupee denominated shares for conversion.
These proceeds can be kept in Resident Foreign
Currency (Domestic) accounts in India by the
resident shareholders who have tendered such
shares for conversion into ADRs/GDRs.

PROVISIONS RELATING TO ISSUE/
TRANSFER OF SHARES

* Shares should be issued within 60 days from
the date of receipt of the inward remittance
received through normal banking channels
including escrow account opened and
maintained for the purpose or by debit to the
NRE/FCNR (B) account of the non-resident
investor.
* In case, the capital instruments are not issued
within 60 days from the date of receipt of the
inward remittance, the amount of consideration
so received should be refunded within fifteen
days from the date of completion of sixty days to
the non-resident investor
* Non-compliance with the above provision
would be reckoned as a contravention under
FEMA and would attract penal provisions. In
exceptional cases, delay in refund of the amount
of consideration may be considered by the RBI,
on the merits of the case.

Issue price of shares
Price of shares issued to persons resident
outside India under the FDI Policy, shall not be
less than -
a. the price worked out in accordance with the
SEBI guidelines, as applicable, where the shares
of the company are listed on any recognised
stock exchange in India;
b. the fair valuation of shares done by a SEBI
registered Merchant Banker or a Chartered
Accountant as per any internationally accepted
pricing methodology on arm's length basis,
where the shares of the company are not listed
on any recognised stock exchange in India; and
c. the price as applicable to transfer of shares
from resident to non-resident as per the pricing
guidelines laid down by the Reserve Bank from
time to time, where the issue of shares is on
preferential allotment.

Foreign Currency Account
Indian companies which are eligible to issue
shares to persons resident outside India under
the FDI Policy may be allowed to retain the
share subscription amount in a Foreign Currency
Account, in accordance with RBI guidelines.



4. Transfer of shares and convertible
debentures.
(a) Shares shall be issued within 180 days
Shares should be issued within 180 days from
the date of receipt of the inward remittance
received through normal banking channels
including escrow account opened and
maintained for the purpose or by debit to the
NRE/FCNR (B) account of the nonresident
investor.

(b) Failure for issue of shares within 180 days
If the capital instruments are not issued within
180 days from the date of receipt of the inward
remittance, the amount of consideration so
received should be refunded immediately to the
non resident investor by outward remittance
through normal banking channels..


(c) Non-compliance
Non-compliance with the above provision would
be reckoned as a contravention under FEMA
and would attract penal provisions. In
exceptional cases, refund of the amount of
consideration outstanding beyond a period of
180 days from the date of receipt may be
considered by the RBI, on the merits of the case.

Issue price of shares
Issue price of shares to the person resident
outside India under the FDI Policy, shall not he
less than:
(a) The price worked out in accordance with the
SEBI guidelines where the shares of the
company are listed on any recognised stock
exchange in India:
(b) The fair valuation of shares done by a SEBI
registered Merchant Banker or a Chartered
Accountant as per any internationally accepted
pricing methodology on arm's length basis,
where the shares of the company are not listed
in India; and
(c) The price as applicable to transfer of shares
from resident to non-resident as per the pricing
guidelines laid down by the RBI from time to
time, where the issue of shares is on preferential
allotment.

Note: When non-residents are make investments
in an Indian company in compliance with the
provisions of the Companies Act, as applicable,
by way of subscription to its MOA, such
investments may be made at face value subject
to their eligibility under the FDI scheme.


Foreign Currency Account
Indian companies which are eligible to issue
shares to persons resident outside India under
the FDI Policy may be allowed to retain the
share subscription amount in a Foreign Currency
Account, with the prior approval of RBI.

Transfer of shares and convertible debentures
Non-resident investors/Non-resident Indian can
also invest "in Indian companies by purchasing
existing shares from Indian shareholders or from
other non-resident shareholders subject to the
following conditions:
(a) A person resident outside India (Except NRI
& OCB) may transfer by way of sale or gift. (b)
NRIs may transfer by way of sale or gift the
shares or convertible debentures held by them to
another NRI.
(c) A person resident outside India can transfer
any security to a person resident in India by way
of gift.
(d) A person resident outside India can sell the
shares and convertible debentures of an Indian
company on a recognized Stock Exchange in
India through a stock broker or a merchant
banker. (e) A person resident in India can
transfer by way of sale, shares/convertible
debentures of an Indian company in sectors
other than financial services sectors.
(f) General permission is also available for
transfer of shares/convertible debentures, by
way of sale under private arrangement by a
person resident outside India to a person
resident in India. Note: Government approval is
not required for transfer of shares in the investee
company from one non resident to another non-
resident in sectors which are under automatic
route. In addition, approval of Government will
be required for transfer of stake from one
nonresident to another non-resident in sectors
which are under Government approval route.
AD Category-I banks have been given general
permission to open Escrow account and Special
account of non-resident corporate for open
offers/exit offers and delisting of shares. The
facilities will be applicable for both issue of fresh
shares to the non- residents as well as transfer
of shares from/to the non-residents

Form FC-TRS: The Form FC-TRS should be
submitted to the AD Category-I Bank, within 60
days from the date of receipt of the amount of
consideration. The onus of submission of the
Form FCTRS within the given time-frame would
be on the transferor/transferee resident in India.
However, in cases where the NR investor,
including an NRI. acquires shares on the stock
exchanges under the FDI Scheme, the investee
company would have to file form FC-TRS with
the AD Category-I bank.

Prior Permission of RBI
(i) Transfer of capital instruments from resident
to non-residents by way of sale where:
(a) Transfer is at a price which falls outside the
pricing guidelines prescribed under Foreign
Exchange Management (Non-Debt Instruments)
Rules, 2019 from time to time and the transaction
does not fall under the exception given in para
5.2.
(b) Transfer of capital instruments by the non-
resident acquirer involving deferment of payment
of the amount of consideration. Further, in case
approval is granted for a transaction, the same
should be reported in Form FC-TRS, to an AD
Category-I bank for necessary due diligence,
within
60 days from the date of receipt of the full and
final amount of consideration.

(ii) Transfer of any capital instrument, by way of
gift by a person resident in India to a person
resident outside India. While forwarding
applications to Reserve Bank for approval for
transfer of capital instruments by way of gift, the
documents mentioned in Section 2 below should
be enclosed. Reserve Bank considers the
following factors while processing such
applications:
(a) The proposed transferee (donee) is eligible
to hold such capital instruments under the
relevant Schedules under Foreign Exchange
Management (Non-Debt Instruments) Rules,
2019, as amended from time to time.
(b) The gift does not exceed 5 per cent of the
paid-up capital of the Indian company/each
series of debentures/each mutual fund scheme.

(c) The applicable sectoral cap limit in the Indian
company is not breached.
(d) The transferor (donor) and the proposed
transferee (donee) are close relatives as defined
in Section 2 (77) of Companies Act, 2013, as
amended from time to time.
(e) The value of capital instruments to be
transferred together with any capital instruments
already transferred by the transferor, as gift, to
any person residing outside India does not
exceed the rupee equivalent of USD 50,000
during the financial year.
(f) Such other conditions as stipulated by
Reserve Bank in public interest from time to
time.

(iii) Transfer of shares from NRI to non-resident.


In the following cases, approval of RBI is not
required:
Transfer of shares from a Non-Resident to
Resident under the FDI scheme where the
pricing guidelines under FEMA, 1999 are not met
provided that:
(i) The original and resultant investment are in
line with the extant FDI policy and FEMA
regulations in terms of sectoral caps,
conditionalities (such as minimum capitalization,
etc.), reporting requirements, documentation,
etc.;
(ii) The pricing for the transaction is compliant
with the specific/explicit, extant and relevant
SEBI regulations/guidelines (such as IPO, Book
building, block deals, delisting, exit, open
offer/substantial acquisition/SEBI SAST, buy
back); and
(iii) Chartered Accountants Certificate to the
effect that compliance with the relevant SEBI
regulations/ guidelines as indicated above is
attached to the form FC-TRS to be filed with the
AD bank.

Transfer of shares from Resident to Non-
Resident:
(i) where the transfer of shares requires the prior
approval of the Government as per the extant
FDI policy provided that:
(a) the requisite approval of the Government has
been obtained; and
(b) the transfer of shares adheres with the
pricing guidelines and documentation
requirements as specified by the Reserve Bank
of India from time to time.
(ii) where the transfer of shares attract SEBI
(SAST) Regulations subject to the adherence
with the pricing guidelines and documentation
requirements as specified by Reserve Bank of
India from time to time.
(iii) where the transfer of shares does not meet
the pricing guidelines under the FEMA, 1999
provided that:
(a) The resultant FDI is in compliance with the
extant FDI policy and FEMA rules/regulations in
terms of sectoral caps, conditionalities (such as
minimum capitalization, etc.), reporting
requirements, documentation etc.;
(b) The pricing for the transaction is compliant
with the specific/explicit, extant and relevant
SEBI regulations/guidelines (such as IPO, Book
building, block deals, delisting, exit, open offer/
substantial acquisition/SEBI SAST); and
(c) Chartered Accountants Certificate to the
effect that compliance with the relevant SEBI
regulations/ guidelines as indicated above is
attached to the form FC-TRS to be filed with the
AD bank.
(iv) where the investee company is in the
financial sector provided that:
(a) Any 'fit and proper/due diligence'
requirements as regards the non-resident
investor as stipulated by the respective financial
sector regulator, from time to time, have been
complied with; and
(b) The FDI policy and FEMA rules/regulations in
terms of sectoral caps, conditionalities (such as
minimum capitalization, pricing, etc.), reporting
requirements, documentation etc., are complied
with.
Conversion of ECB/Lump sum Fee/Royalty etc.
into Equity
Indian companies have been granted general
permission for conversion of External
Commercial Borrowings (ECB) (excluding those
deemed as ECB) in convertible foreign currency
into equity shares/ fully compulsorily and
mandatorily convertible preference shares,
subject to the following conditions and reporting
requirements:
(a) The activity of the company is covered under
the Automatic Route for FDI or the company has
obtained Government approval for foreign equity
in the company;
(b) The foreign equity after conversion of ECB
into equity is within the sectoral cap, if any;
(c) Pricing of shares is as per the provision of
para 2 above;
(d) Compliance with the requirements prescribed
under any other statute and regulation in force;
and (e) The conversion facility is available for
ECBs availed under the Automatic or
Government Route and is applicable to ECBs,
due for payment or not, as well as
secured/unsecured loans availed from non-
resident collaborators

Legal Compliances with respect to Conversion
of Lump Sum Fee/Royalty into Equity
An Indian company can issue of
shares/preference shares against lump sum
technical know-how fee, royalty due for payment,
subject to entry route, sectoral cap and pricing
guidelines and compliance with applicable tax
laws.

Further, issue of equity shares against any other
funds payable by the investee company,
remittance of which does not require prior
permission of the Government of India or RBI
under FEMA. 1999 or any rules regulations
framed or directions issued thereunder, or has
been permitted by the RBI. provided that:
(a) The equity shares shall be issued in
accordance with the extant FDI guidelines on
sectoral caps, pricing guidelines etc. as
amended by RBI, from time to time;
(b) The issue of equity shares shall be subject to
tax laws as applicable to the funds payable and
the conversion to equity should be net of
applicable taxes.

Wholly owned subsidiary of a Non-Resident
Entity
A wholly owned subsidiary set up in India by a
non-resident entity, operating in a sector where
100 percent foreign investment is allowed in the
automatic route and there are no FDI linked
conditionalities, may issue equity shares or
preference shares or convertible debentures or
warrants to the said non-resident entity against
pre-incorporation/ pre-operative expenses
incurred by the said non-resident entity up to a
limit of 5 percent of its capital or USD 500,000
whichever is less, subject to the condition that
within 30 days from the date of issue of equity
instruments but not later than one year from the
date of incorporation or such time as the
Reserve Bank permits, the Indian company shall
report the transaction to the Reserve Bank as
per the reporting requirements as specified by
the Reserve Bank


Issue of Equity Share under Government Route
Issue of equity shares under the FDI policy is
allowed under the Govt, route (Approval Route)
for the following:

(I) import of capital goods/ machinery/ equipment
(excluding second-hand machinery), subject to
compliance with the following conditions:
(a) Any import of capital goods/machinery etc.,
made by a resident in India, has to be in
accordance with the Export/Import Policy issued
by Government of India/as defined by
DGFT/FEMA provisions relating to imports.
(b) The application clearly indicating the
beneficial ownership and identity of the Importer
Company as well as overseas entity.
(c) Applications complete in all respects, for
conversions of import payables for capital goods
into
FDI being made within 180 days from the date of
shipment of goods.
(II) pre-operative/pre-incorporation expenses
(including payments of rent etc.), subject to
compliance with the following conditions:
(a) Submission of FIRC for remittance of funds
by the overseas promoters for the expenditure
incurred. (b) Verification and certification of the
pre-incorporation/pre-operative expenses by the
statutory auditor.
(c) Payments should be made by the foreign
investor to the company directly or through the
bank account opened by the foreign investor as
provided under FEMA Regulations.
180 days from the date of incorporation of the
company.

(a) All requests for conversion should be
accompanied by a special resolution of the
company.
clearance.

Issue of Rights/Bonus Shares
Companies Act, as applicable, SEBI (Issue of
Capital and Disclosure Requirements)
Regulations, 2009 (in case of listed companies),
etc.
? The offer on right basis to the persons resident
outside India shall be:
(i) in the case of shares of a company listed on a
recognized stock exchange in India, at a price as
determined by the company;
(ii) in the case of shares of a company not listed
on a recognized stock exchange in India, at a
price which is not less than the price at which the
offer on right basis is made to resident
shareholders.

Acquisition of shares under Scheme of
Merger/Demerger/Amalgamation
Mergers/demergers/ amalgamations of
companies in India are usually governed by an
order issued by a competent Court on the basis
of the Scheme submitted by the companies
undergoing merger/demerger/amalgamation.
Once the scheme of merger or demerger or
amalgamation of two or more Indian companies
has been approved by a Court in India, the
transferee company or new company is allowed
to issue shares to the shareholders of the
transferor company resident outside India,
subject to the conditions that:
(i) the percentage of shareholding of persons
resident outside India in the transferee or new
company does not exceed the sectoral cap, and
(ii) the transferor company or the transferee or
the new company is not engaged in activities
which are prohibited under the FDI policy.
Note: Government approval would not be
required in case of mergers and acquisitions
taking place in sectors under automatic route.

Issue of Employees Stock Option Scheme
(ESOPs) / Sweat Equity
An Indian company may issue "employees' stock
option" and/or "sweat equity shares" to its
employees/directors or employees/directors of its
holding company or joint venture or wholly
owned overseas subsidiary/subsidiaries who are
resident outside India, provided that :
a. The scheme has been drawn either in terms
of regulations issued under the Securities
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 or the
Companies (Share Capital and Debentures)
Rules, 2014 notified by the Central Government
under the Companies Act 2013, as the case may
be.
b. The "employee's stock option"/ "sweat equity
shares" issued to non-resident
employees/directors under the applicable
rules/regulations are in compliance with the
sectoral cap applicable to the said company.
c. Issue of "employee's stock option"/ "sweat
equity shares" by a company where foreign
investment is under the approval route shall
require prior approval of Government of India.
d. Issue of "employee's stock option"/ "sweat
equity shares" under the applicable
rules/regulations to an employee/director who is
a citizen of Bangladesh/Pakistan shall require
prior approval of the Government of India.
e. The issuing company shall furnish to the
Regional Office concerned of the Reserve Bank
of India under whose jurisdiction the registered
office of the company operates, within 30 days
from the date of issue of employees' stock option
or sweat equity shares, a return as per the Form-
ESOP.

Pledge of Shares
The transfer of equity instruments of an Indian
company or units of an investment vehicle by
way of pledge is subject to the following terms
and conditions, namely :-
(i) any person being a promoter of a company
registered in India (borrowing company), which
has raised external commercial borrowing in
compliance with the Foreign Exchange
Management (Borrowing and Lending in Foreign
Exchange) Regulations, 2000 may pledge the
shares of the borrowing company or that of its
associate resident companies for the purpose of
securing the external commercial borrowing
raised by the borrowing company subject to the
following further conditions, namely :-
(a) the period of such pledge shall be co-
terminus with the maturity of the underlying
external commercial borrowing;
(b) in case of invocation of pledge, transfer shall
be made in accordance with these rules and
directions issued by the Reserve Bank;
(c) the statutory auditor has certified that the
borrowing company shall utilise or has utilised
the proceeds of the external commercial
borrowing for the permitted end-use only; (d) no
person shall pledge any such share unless a no-
objection has been obtained from an authorised
dealer bank that the above conditions have been
complied with;


(ii) any person resident outside India holding
equity instruments in an Indian company or units
of an investment vehicle may pledge the equity
instruments or units, as the case may be,- (a) in
favour of a bank in India to secure the credit
facilities being extended to such Indian company
for bona fide purposes,
(b) in favour of an overseas bank to secure the
credit facilities being extended to such person or
a person resident outside India who is the
promoter of such Indian company or the
overseas group company of such Indian
company,
(c) in favour of a non-banking financial company
registered with the Reserve Bank to secure the
credit facilities being extended to such Indian
company for bona fide purposes,
(d) subject to the authorised dealer bank
satisfying itself of the compliance of the
conditions stipulated by the Reserve Bank in this
regard;
(iii) in case of invocation of pledge, transfer of
equity instruments of an Indian company or units
shall be in accordance with entry routes, sectoral
caps or investment limits, pricing guidelines and
other attendant conditions at the time of creation
of pledge

REMITTANCE, REPORTING AND VIOLATION
Remittance of sale proceeds/Remittance on
winding up/Liquidation of Companies:
(i) Sale proceeds of shares and securities and
their remittance is 'remittance of asset' governed
by The Foreign Exchange Management
(Remittance of Assets) Regulations, 2000 under
FEMA.
(ii) AD Category-I bank can allow the remittance
of sale proceeds of a security (net of applicable
taxes) to the seller of shares resident outside
India, provided the security has been held on
repatriation basis, the sale of security has been
made in accordance with the prescribed
guidelines and NOC/tax clearance certificate
from the Income Tax
Department has been produced.

Remittance on winding up/liquidation of
Companies
* AD Category-I banks have been allowed to
remit winding up proceeds of companies in
India, which are under liquidation, subject to
payment of applicable taxes.
* Liquidation may be subject to any order issued
by the court winding up the company or the
official liquidator in case of voluntary winding up
under the provisions of the Companies Act, as
applicable. AD Category-I banks shall allow the
remittance provided the applicant submits: (a)
No objection or Tax clearance certificate from
Income Tax Department for the remittance. (b)
Auditor's certificate confirming that all liabilities in
India have been either fully paid or adequately
provided for.
(c) Auditor's certificate to the effect that the
winding up is in accordance with the provisions
of the Companies Act, as applicable.
(d) In case of winding up otherwise than by a
court, an auditor's certificate to the effect that
there are no legal proceeding spending in any
court in India against the applicant or the
company under liquidation and there is no legal
impediment in permitting the remittance.

Repatriation of Dividend
Dividends are freely repatriable without any
restrictions (net after Tax deduction at source or
Dividend Distribution Tax, if any, as the case
may be). The repatriation is governed by the
provisions of the Foreign Exchange
Management (Current Account Transactions)
Rules, 2000, as amended from time to time

Repatriation of Interest
Interest on fully, mandatorily & compulsorily
convertible debentures is also freely repatriable
without any restrictions (net of applicable taxes).
The repatriation is governed by the provisions of
the Foreign Exchange Management (Current
Account Transactions) Rules, 2000, as amended
from time to time.


Reporting of FDI
* An Indian company receiving FDI for issuing
shares/convertible debentures/ preference
shares, should report the details of the amount of
consideration to the Regional Office concerned
of the RBI not later than 30 days from the date of
receipt in the Advance Reporting Form.
* Indian companies are required to report the
details of the receipt of the amount of
consideration for issue of shares/convertible
debentures, through an AD Category-I bank,
KYC report on the non-resident investor from the
overseas bank remitting the amount.
Identification Number (UIN) for the amount
reported.

o up to two lakh Rupees where the amount is not
quantifiable, and
o where such contraventions is a continuing one,
further penalty which may extend to five
thousand Rupees for every day after the first day
during which the contraventions continues.

Adjudication and Appeals
For the purpose of adjudication of any
contravention of FEMA, the Ministry of Finance
as per the provisions contained in the Foreign
Exchange Management (Adjudication
Proceedings and Appeal) Rules, 2000 appoints
officers of the Central Government as the
Adjudicating Authorities for holding an enquiry in
the manner prescribed.
A reasonable opportunity has to be given to the
person alleged to have committed
contraventions against whom a complaint has
been made for being heard before imposing any
penalty.
The Central Government may appoint as per the
provisions contained in the Foreign Exchange
Management (Adjudication Proceedings and
Appeal) Rules, 2000, an Appellate Authority/
Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals against the
orders of the adjudicating authority
ESTABLISHMENT OF BRANCH OFFICE (BO)/
LIAISON OFFICE (LO)/ PROJECT OFFICE (PO)
IN INDIA
Branch Office
Branch office in relation to a company, means
any establishment described as such by the
company. Permitted activities for a branch office
in India of a person resident outside India
Normally, the branch office should be engaged in
the activity in which the parent company is
engaged.
(i) Export/import of goods.
(ii) Rendering professional or consultancy
services.
(iii) Carrying out research work in which the
parent company is engaged.
(iv) Promoting technical or financial
collaborations between Indian companies and
parent or overseas group company.
(v) Representing the parent company in India
and acting as buying/ selling agent in India.
(vi) Rendering services in Information
Technology and development of software in
India.
(vii) Rendering technical support to the products
supplied by parent/group companies.
(viii) Representing a foreign airline/shipping
company.

Liaison Office
Liaison Office means a place of business to act
as a channel of communication between the
principal place of business or Head Office or by
whatever name called and entities in India but
which does not undertake any commercial
/trading/ industrial activity, directly or indirectly,
and maintains itself out of inward remittances
received from abroad through normal banking
channel.
Permitted activities for a liaison office in India of
a person resident outside India (i) Representing
the parent company / group companies in India.
(ii) Promoting export / import from / to India.
(iii) Promoting technical/ financial collaborations
between parent / group companies and
companies in India.
(iv) Acting as a communication channel between
the parent company and Indian companies.


Project Office
Project office means a place of business in India
to represent the interests of the foreign company
executing a project in India but excludes a
Liaison Office.
Parameters of project office
A foreign company may open project office/s in
India provided it has secured from an Indian
company, a contract to execute a project in
India, and
(i) the project is funded directly by inward
remittance from abroad; or
(ii) the project is funded by a bilateral or
multilateral International Financing Agency; or
(iii) the project has been cleared by an
appropriate authority; or
(iv) a company or entity in India awarding the
contract has been granted term loan by a Public
Financial Institution or a bank in India for the
Project.


Lesson 3: Overseas Direct Investment

Overseas Direct Investment (ODI) means:
(i) Acquisition of any unlisted equity capital or
subscription as a part of the Memorandum of
Association of a foreign entity, or
(ii) Investment in 10% or more of the paid-up
equity capital of a listed foreign entity, or
(iii) Investment with control where investment is
less than 10% of the paid-up equity capital of a
listed foreign entity.

Foreign Entity means an entity formed or
registered or incorporated outside India,
including in
International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) in
India, that has limited liability.
Control means the right to appoint majority of the
directors or to control the management or policy
decisions exercisable by a person or persons
acting individually or in concert, directly or
indirectly, including by virtue of their
shareholding or management rights or
shareholders' agreements or voting agreements
that entitle them to ten percent or more of voting
rights or in any other manner in the entity

Overseas Investment means financial
commitment and Overseas Portfolio Investment
by a person resident in India.

Financial Commitment by a person resident in
India means the aggregate amount of
investment by way of ODI, debt other than
Overseas Portfolio Investment (OPI) and non-
fund-based facility or facilities extended by it to
all foreign entities.

Indian Entity
A Company defined under the Companies Act,
2013.
A Body corporate incorporated by any law for the
time being in force.
A Limited Liability Partnership formed under the
Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008.
A Partnership firm registered under the Indian
Partnership Act, 1932.

Overseas Portfolio Investment (OPI) means
investment, other than ODI, in foreign securities,
but not in any unlisted debt instruments or any
security issued by a person resident in India who
is not in an IFSC

Debt instruments are :
(i) Government bonds;
(ii) corporate bonds;
(iii) all tranches of securitisation structure which
are not equity tranche;
(iv) borrowings by firms through loans; and
(v) depository receipts whose underlying
securities are debt securities.

Procedure for Making Overseas Investment
1 The person intending to make any financial
commitment shall fill up the Form FC duly
supported by the requisite documents and
approach the designated Authorised Dealer (AD)
bank for making the investment/remittance.
2 In respect of any case under the approval
route, the applicant shall approach their
designated AD bank who shall forward the
proposal to the Reserve Bank after due scrutiny
and with its specific recommendations. The
application for overseas investment under the
approval route would continue to be submitted to
the Reserve Bank in physical/electronic form
through email as hitherto, in addition to the
online reporting.
3 The designated AD bank before forwarding the
proposal shall submit the relevant sections of the
Form FC in the online OID application and the
transaction number generated by the application
shall be mentioned in their reference.
4 The following documents shall be submitted
along with the proposal:
? Background and brief details of the transaction.
? Reason(s) for seeking approval mentioning the
extant FEMA provisions.
? Observations of the designated AD bank with
respect to the following:
- Prima facie viability of the foreign entity;
- Benefits which may accrue to India through
such investment;

- Financial position and business track record of
the Indian entity and the foreign entity; - Any
other material observation.
5 Recommendations of the designated AD bank
with confirmation that the applicant's board
resolution or resolution from an equivalent body,
as applicable, for the proposed transaction(s) is
in place.
6 Diagrammatic representation of the
organisational structure indicating all the
subsidiaries of the Indian entity horizontally and
vertically with their stake (direct and indirect) and
status (whether operating company or SPV).
7 Valuation certificate for the foreign entity (if
applicable).
8 Other relevant documents properly numbered,
indexed and flagged.
9 The proposal shall be submitted to the
Reserve Bank of India.

Approval from the Central Government
The applications for overseas
investment/financial commitment in
Pakistan/other jurisdiction as may be advised by
the Central Government from time to time, shall
be forwarded by the AD to the Reserve Bank as
per the laid down procedure for onward
submission to the Central
Government.

Approval from the Reserve Bank
Financial commitment by an Indian entity,
exceeding USD 1 (one) billion (or its equivalent)
in a financial year shall require prior approval of
the Reserve Bank even when the total financial
commitment of the Indian entity is within the
eligible limit under the automatic route
No Objection Certificate (NOC) from the lender
bank/regulatory body/investigative agency Any
person resident in India having an account
appearing as a Non-Performing Asset (NPA) or
is classified as wilful defaulter or is under
investigation by a financial sector regulator/
investigative agency shall obtain an NOC from
the lender bank/regulatory body/investigative
agency concerned before making financial
commitment or undertaking disinvestment.

Where an Indian entity has already issued a
guarantee in accordance with the FEMA
provisions before an investigation has begun or
account is classified as NPA/wilful defaulter and
subsequently is required to honour such
contractual obligation, such remittance due to
the invocation will not constitute fresh financial
commitment and hence NOC shall not be
required.

Mode of Payment
A person resident in India making Overseas
Investment may make payment -
a) by remittance made through banking
channels;
b) from funds held in an account maintained in
accordance with the provisions of the Foreign
Exchange Management Act;
c) by swap of securities;
d) by using the proceeds of American Depository
Receipts or Global Depositary Receipts or stock
swap of such receipts or external commercial
borrowings
e) Overseas investment by way of cash is not
permitted
f) An Indian entity can make remittances to its
office/branch outside India only for the purpose
of normal business operations of such branch or
office.
g) A person resident in India shall not make any
payment on behalf of any foreign entity other
than by way of financial commitment as
permitted under the OI Rules/Regulations
h) Any investment/financial commitment in Nepal
and Bhutan shall be done in a manner as
provided in the Foreign Exchange Management
(Manner of Receipt and Payment)
Regulations, 2016


Transfer or Liquidation
* A person resident in India holding equity capital
in accordance with OI Rules may transfer such
investment in the manner provided in these rules
and the Foreign Exchange
Management (Overseas Investment)
Regulations, 2022

* A person resident in India may transfer equity
capital by way of sale to a person resident in
India, who is eligible to make such investment
under these rules, or to a person resident outside
India.

* In case the transfer is on account of merger,
amalgamation or demerger or on account of
buyback of foreign securities, such transfer or
liquidation in case of liquidation of the foreign
entity, shall have the approval of the competent
authority as per the applicable laws in India or
the laws of the host country or host jurisdiction,
as the case may be.

* It is clarified that where the transferor is
required to repatriate all the dues before
disinvestment, such requirement shall not apply
to the dues that do not arise on account of
investment in equity or debt like export
receivables, etc.

Obligations of the Person Resident in India
1 A person resident in India acquiring equity
capital in a foreign entity, which is reckoned as
ODI, shall submit the evidence of investment to
the AD bank within six months, failing which the
funds remitted overseas shall be repatriated
within the said period of six months.
2 The evidence of investment shall be retained
by the designated AD bank, who shall monitor
the receipt of required documents and satisfy
themselves about the bona fides of the
documents so received.
3 Form FC shall be submitted along with
requisite documents to AD bank for obtaining
UIN on or before making initial ODI.
4 The AD bank after due verification shall report
the details in the OID application for allotment of
UIN.
5 Any remittance towards a foreign entity shall
be facilitated by the AD bank only after obtaining
the necessary UIN for such entity.
6 The allotment of UIN does not constitute an
approval from the Reserve Bank for the
investment made/to be made in the foreign
entity.
7 The issue of UIN only signifies taking on
record of the investment for maintaining the
database

Manner of making Overseas Direct Investment
by Indian entity
An Indian entity may make ODI by way of
investment in equity capital for the purpose of
undertaking bonafide business activity in the
manner and subject to the limits and prescribed
conditions.
The ODI may be made or held by way of,-
(i) subscription as part of memorandum of
association or purchase of equity capital, listed
or unlisted;
(ii) acquisition through bidding or tender
procedure;
(iii) acquisition of equity capital by way of rights
issue or allotment of bonus shares;
(iv) capitalisation, within the time period, if any,
specified for realisation under the Act, of any
amount due towards the Indian entity from the
foreign entity, the remittance of which is
permitted under the Act or does not require prior
permission of the Central Government or the
Reserve
Bank under the Act or any rules or regulations
made or directions issued thereunder;
(v) the swap of securities;
(vi) merger, demerger, amalgamation or any
scheme of arrangement as per the applicable
laws in India or laws of the host country or the
host jurisdiction, as the case may be.




Limit for Financial Commitment
The total financial commitment made by an
Indian entity in all the foreign entities taken
together at the time of undertaking such
commitment shall not exceed 400 percent of its
net worth as on the date of the last audited
balance sheet or as directed by the Reserve
Bank, in consultation with Central Government
from time to time.
The total financial commitment shall not include
capitalisation of retained earnings for reckoning
such limit but shall include-
(i) utilisation of the amount raised by the issue of
American Depository Receipts or Global
Depositary Receipts and stock-swap of such
receipts; and
(ii) utilisation of the proceeds from External
Commercial Borrowings to the extent the
corresponding pledge or creation of charge on
assets to raise such borrowings has not already
been reckoned towards the above limit.

Note: the financial commitment made by
Maharatna or Navratna or Miniratna or
subsidiaries of
in;
(ii) the Trust or the Society, as the case may be,
should have been in existence for at least three
financial years before the year in which such
investment is being made;
(iii) the trust deed in case of a Trust, and the
memorandum of association or rules or byelaws
in case of a Society shall permit the proposed
ODI;
(iv) such investment have the approval of the
trustees in case of a Trust and the governing
body or council or managing or executive
committee in case of a Society;
(v) in case the Trust or the Society require
special licence or permission either from the
Ministry of Home Affairs, Central Government or
from the relevant local authority, as the case
may be, the special licence or permission has
been obtained and submitted to the designated
AD bank.
Overseas Investment in IFSC by Person
Resident in India a person resident in India may
make Overseas Investment in an IFSC in India
Provided that -
(i) in the case of an ODI made in an IFSC, the
approval by the financial services regulator
concerned, wherever applicable, shall be
decided within forty-five days from the date of
application complete in all respects failing which
it shall be deemed to be approved;
(ii) an Indian entity not engaged in financial
services activity in India, making ODI in a foreign
entity, which is directly or indirectly engaged in
financial services activity, except banking or
insurance, who does not meet the net profit
condition as required under Overseas
Investment Rules, may make ODI in an IFSC;
(iii) a person resident in India may make
contribution to an investment fund or vehicle set
up in an IFSC as OPI;
(iv) a resident individual may make ODI in a
foreign entity, including an entity engaged in
financial services activity, (except in banking and
insurance), in IFSC if such entity does not have
subsidiary or step down subsidiary outside IFSC
where the resident individual has control in the
foreign entity

Reporting
A person resident in India who has made ODI or
making financial commitment or undertaking
disinvestment in a foreign entity shall report the
following to the designated AD bank,
(a) financial commitment, whether it is reckoned
towards the financial commitment limit or not, at
the time of sending outward remittance or
making a financial commitment, whichever is
earlier;
(b) disinvestment within thirty days of receipt of
disinvestment proceeds;
(c) restructuring within thirty days from the date
of such restructuring

A person resident in India other than a resident
individual making any Overseas Portfolio
Investment (OPI) or transferring such OPI by
way of sale shall report such investment or
transfer of investment within 60 days from the
end of the half-year in which such investment or
transfer is made as of September or March-end.

In case a person resident in India has made a
delay in filing the requisite form/return/document,
etc has to pay the Late Submission Fee (LSF)
through the designated AD bank in accordance
with OI Regulations
Restrictions and Prohibitions
Unless otherwise provided in the FEMA or these
ODI Rules, no person resident in India shall
make ODI in a foreign entity engaged in -
(a) real estate activity;
(b) gambling in any form; and
(c) dealing with financial products linked to the
Indian rupee without specific approval of the
Reserve Bank
Explanation.- the expression "real estate activity"
means buying and selling of real estate or
trading in Transferable Development Rights but
does not include the development of townships,
construction of residential or commercial
premises, roads or bridges for selling or leasing.

Any ODI in start-ups recognised under the laws
of the host country or host jurisdiction as the
case may be, shall be made by an Indian entity
only from the internal accruals whether from the
Indian entity or group or associate companies in
India and in case of resident individuals, from
own funds of such an individual.
No person resident in India shall make financial
commitment in a foreign entity that has invested
or invests into India, at the time of making such
financial commitment or at any time thereafter,
either directly or indirectly, resulting in a structure
with more than two layers of subsidiaries.


It may be noted that such restriction shall not
apply to the following classes of companies
mentioned in Rule 2(2) of the Companies
(Restriction on Number of Layers) Rules, 2017
as may be amended from time to time, namely:-
(a) a banking company as defined in clause (c)
of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
(b) a non-banking financial company as defined
in clause (f) of section 45-I of the Reserve Bank
of India Act, 1934 which is registered with the
Reserve Bank and considered as systematically
important nonbanking financial company by the
Reserve Bank;
(c) an insurance company being a company
which carries on the business of insurance in
accordance with provisions of the Insurance Act,
1938 and the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority Act, 1999; and
(d) a Government company referred to in clause
(45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013.


Restriction on Acquisition or Transfer of
Immovable Property Outside India
(1) A person resident in India shall not acquire or
transfer any immovable property situated outside
India without general or special permission of the
Reserve Bank. However, following property
excluded-
(a) held by a person resident in India who is a
national of a foreign State;
(b) acquired by a person resident in India on or
before the 8th day of July, 1947 and continued to
be held by such person with the permission of
the Reserve Bank;
(c) acquired by a person resident in India on a
lease not exceeding five years.

(2) A person resident in India may acquire
immovable property outside India by way of
inheritance or gift or purchase from a person
resident in India who has acquired such property
as per the foreign exchange provisions in force
at the time of such acquisition.
Further, a person resident in India may acquire
immovable property outside India from a person
resident outside India-
(a) by way of inheritance;
(b) by way of purchase out of foreign exchange
held in RFC account;
(c) by way of purchase out of the remittances
sent under the Liberalised Remittance Scheme
instituted by the Reserve Bank.
Provided that such remittances under the
Liberalised Remittance Scheme may be
consolidated in respect of relatives if such
relatives, being persons resident in India, comply
with the terms and conditions of the Scheme;
(d) jointly with a relative who is a person resident
outside India;
(e) out of the income or sale proceeds of the
assets, other than ODI, acquired overseas under
the provisions of the Act

(3) An Indian entity having an overseas office
may acquire immovable property outside India
for the business and residential purposes of its
staff, as per the directions issued by the Reserve
Bank from time to time.

(4) A person resident in India who has acquired
any immovable property outside India in
accordance with the foreign exchange provisions
in force at the time of such acquisition may- (a)
transfer such property by way of gift to a person
resident in India who is eligible to acquire such
property under these rules or by way of sale;
(b) create a charge on such property in
accordance with the Act or the rules or
regulations made thereunder or directions issued
by the Reserve Bank from time to time.
(5) The holding of any investment in immovable
property or transfer thereof in any manner shall
not be permitted if the initial investment in
immovable property was not permitted under the
Foreign Exchange Management Act.


Lesson 4 EXTERNAL COMMERCIAL
BORROWING
INTRODUCTION
ECBs are commercial loans raised by eligible
resident entities from recognized non- resident
entities and should conform to parameters such
as minimum maturity, permitted and non-
permitted end-uses, maximum all-in-cost ceiling,
etc. These parameters apply in totality and not
on a standalone basis.
The framework for raising loans through ECB
comprises the following 2 options Parameters
Foreign Currency Indian Rupee denominated
ECB denominated ECB
                                                                                                    Loans including
                                                                                    Loans including bank loans;
                                                      Forms        of               bank loans;     floating/
                                                                                    fixed rate
                                                                                    notes/bonds/
                                                      ECB          floating/        debentures/
 fixed rate notes/ bonds/ preference shares ;
debentures (other than fully and compulsorily
convertible Trade credits beyond 3 yrs; and
instruments); Trade credits Financial Lease.
Also, plain vanilla beyond 3 Yrs; Rupee
denominated bonds issued
                                            overseas,
                                            which can be
 FCCB;                                     either Placed
 Foreign Currency privately or listed on
exchanges as Exchangeable Bonds and per host
country Regulations. Financial Lease.
                                                                   All entities eligible
                                                                   to receive a) All
                                                                   entities eligible to
                                                      Eligible     raise Foreign
                                                                   FDI. Further, the Currency ECB;
                                                     Borrowers     following             and
entities are also eligible to b) Registered entities
engaged in raise ECB:                                micro-finance activities,
                                                     registered Not
                                                     for Profit
                                                     companies, 
 Port Trusts;                                       Units in SEZ; registered       societies/trusts/
                                                     cooperatives
 SIDBI; and                                         and NGO.
 EXIM Bank of India.

AVAILABLE ROUTES FOR RAISING ECB

Automatic Route
Approval Route
The cases are examined by the Authorised
Dealer Category-I (AD Category-I) banks.
The prospective borrowers are required to send
their requests to the RBI through their ADs for
examination.




RECOGNISED LENDERS
The lender should be resident of Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) or International Organisation
of Securities Commission's IOSCO compliant
country, including on transfer of ECB. However,
a. Multilateral and Regional Financial Institutions
where India is a member country will also be
considered as recognised lenders;
b. Individuals as lenders can only be permitted if
they are foreign equity holders or for subscription
to bonds/debentures listed abroad; and
c. Foreign branches / subsidiaries of Indian
banks are permitted as recognised lenders only
for Foreign Currency ECB (except FCCBs and
FCEBs).
d. Foreign branches / subsidiaries of Indian
banks, subject to applicable prudential norms,
can participate as
arrangers/underwriters/market-makers/traders
for Rupee denominated Bonds issued overseas.
However, underwriting by foreign
branches/subsidiaries of Indian banks for
issuances by another
Indian banks will not be allowed.

FATF Compliant Country
FATF Compliant Country means a country that is
a member of the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF) or a member of a FATF-Style Regional
Body; and should not be a country identified in
the public statement of the FATF as -
i. A jurisdiction having a strategic Anti-Money
Laundering or Combating the Financing of
Terrorism deficiencies to which counter
measures apply; OR ii. A jurisdiction that has not
made sufficient progress in addressing the
deficiencies or has not committed to an action
plan developed with the Financial Action Task
Force to address the deficiencies.

IOSCO Compliant Country
A country whose securities market regulator is a
signatory to the International Organisation of
Securities Commission's (IOSCO's) Multilateral
MOU or a signatory to bilateral MOU with the
SEBI for information sharing arrangements.




MINIMUM AVERAGE MATURITY PERIOD
Category I                                    Category II          Category III
 ECB with minimum average  ECB with
minimum average  ECB with minimum maturity
of 1/5 years. maturity of 10 years. average
maturity of 7
 1 year for ECB raised by  ECB raised for - years.
manufacturing companies up ? Working capital
purposes or  repayment of Rupee to USD 50
million or its general corporate purposes loans
availed equivalent per FY ? On-lending by
NBFCs for domestically
 5 years for ECB raised from working capital
purposes or for capital foreign equity holder for
general corporate purposes. expenditure working
capital purposes,  It may be noted that:  On-
lending by NBFCs for general corporate ? ECB
cannot be raised the same purpose. It purposes
or for repayment of from foreign branches / may
be noted that:
                                                                                                 Indian ? ECB
                                                                                                 cannot be
                                                                                                 raised
                                                        Rupee loans. subsidiaries        of
                                                                     from foreign
 It may be noted that:                                 banks        branches
ECB cannot be raised from ? ECB raised for /
subsidiaries of Indian banks foreign branches /
subsidiaries repayment of Rupee
                                                        of           Indian banks        loans                  availed
domestically for purposes other than capital
expenditure
? On-lending by NBFCs for the same purpose.

ALL-IN-COST CEILING PER ANNUM
All-in-cost ceiling per annum is the Benchmark
rate plus 450 BPS spread.
* It may be noted that All-in-Cost includes rate of
interest, other fees, expenses, charges,
guarantee fees, Export Credit Agency charges
(ECA), whether paid in foreign currency or INR
but will not include commitment fees and
withholding tax payable in INR.
* In the case of fixed rate loans, the swap cost
plus spread should not be more than the floating
rate plus the applicable spread.
* Additionally, for FCCBs, the issue related
expenses should not exceed 4 % of the issue
size and in case of private placement, these
expenses should not exceed 2 % of the issue
size, etc.
* Various components of all in- cost have to be
paid by the borrower without taking recourse to
the drawdown of ECB/TC, i.e., ECB/TC
proceeds cannot be used for payment of
interest/charges.
* Further, Benchmark rate in case of Foreign
Currency ECB refers to 6-months LIBOR rate
(London Inter Bank Offered Rate) of different
currencies or any other 6-month interbank
interest rate applicable to the currency of
borrowing, for eg. EURIBOR.
* Benchmark rate in case of Rupee denominated
ECB/TC will be prevailing yield of the
Government of India securities of corresponding
maturity.
OTHER COSTS
END-USES (NEGATIVE LIST)
Where the proceeds of ECB can-not be used - i.
ii. iii. iv.
corporate purposes or for repayment of Rupee
loans AND
? Except ECB raised for
- Working capital purpose or general corporate
purposes
- On -lending by NBFC's for working capital
purposes or general corporate.
                                                                     General corporate
                                                        v.           purposes,
* Except in case of ECB raised from foreign
equity holder for working capital purposes,
general corporate purposes or for repayment of
Rupee loans and
* Except ECB raised for
- working capital purposes or general corporate
purposes
- on-lending by NBFCs for working capital
purposes or general corporate purposes.
                                                                     Repayment of
                                                        vi.          Rupee loans,
* except in case of ECB raised for
- repayment of Rupee loans availed domestically
for capital expenditure
- on-lending by NBFCs for the same purpose
and
* except ECB raised for
- repayment of Rupee loans availed domestically
for purposes other than capital expenditure
- on-lending by NBFCs for the same purpose.
vii. On-lending to entities for the above activities,
* except in case of ECB raised by NBFCs for
- working capital purposes or general corporate
purposes
- on-lending by NBFCs for working capital
purposes or general corporate purposes and
repayment of Rupee loans availed domestically
for capital expenditure
- on-lending by NBFCs for the same purpose
and
* except ECB raised for
- repayment of Rupee loans availed domestically
for purposes other than capital expenditure
- on-lending by NBFCs for the same purpose.

EXCHANGE RATE
Change of currency of Foreign Currency ECB
into Indian Rupee ECB can be at the exchange
rate prevailing on the date of the agreement for
such change between the parties concerned OR
at an exchange rate, which is less than the rate
prevailing on the date of the agreement, if
consented to by the ECB lender.
For conversion to Rupee, the exchange rate
shall be the rate prevailing on the date of
settlement.

HEDGING PROVISION
The entities raising ECB are required to follow
the guidelines for hedging issued, if any, by the
concerned sectoral or prudential regulator in
respect of foreign currency exposure.
Infrastructure space companies shall have a
Board approved risk management policy.
Further, such companies are required to
mandatorily hedge 70 % of their ECB exposure
in case the average maturity of the ECB is less
than 5 years. The designated AD Category-I
bank shall verify that 70 % hedging requirement
is complied with during the currency of the ECB
and report the position to RBI through Form ECB
2. The following operational aspects with respect
to hedging should be ensured:

                                                                       Tenure and
                                                      Coverage         Rollover           Natural Hedge
                                                                                                             considered only
 The ECB borrower will be  A minimum tenure for the          financial hedge,                              to the extent   rollover, duly of offsetting
of 1 year  Natural hedge, in lieu of required to financial    will be principal as be required              coupon through ensuring that projected
cover the                                         hedge would well as the           with periodic            financial       the            cash
                                                                                    flows /
                                                               exposure on          revenues in
                                                  hedges.      account of ECB matching
                                                  is not
                                                  unhedged at currency, net of all
                                                  any point    other
                                                  during the
                                                  currency of projected
 The financial hedge for all                     the          outflows.
                                                  exposures on
                                                  account of   ECB.
                                                   For this
                                                  purpose, an may be                hedged if the
                                                  ECB time of considered            offsetting                              maturity/cash
                                                  each such    naturally (i.e. the created in the            exposure has flow within
ECB should start from the                         exposure     day the liability is books of the             the borrower). the
same accounting year.
 Any other arrangements/ structures, where
revenues are indexed to foreign currency will not
be considered as a natural
hedge

CHANGE OF CURRENCY OF BORROWING
Change of currency of ECB from one freely
convertible foreign currency to any other freely
convertible foreign currency as well as to Indian
Rupee is freely permitted.
Change of currency from Indian Rupee to any
freely convertible foreign currency is not
permitted.
LIMIT AND LEVERAGE
All eligible borrowers can raise ECB up to USD
750 million or equivalent per FY under the
automatic route.
Further, in case of Foreign Currency
denominated ECB raised from direct foreign
equity holder, ECB liability-equity ratio for ECB
raised under the automatic route cannot exceed
7:1.
However, this ratio will not be applicable if the
outstanding amount of all ECB, including the
proposed one, is up to USD 5 million or its
equivalent.
Further, the borrowing entities will also be
governed by the guidelines on debt equity ratio,
issued, if any, by the sectoral or prudential
regulator concerned.

ISSUANCE OF GUARANTEE, ETC. BY INDIAN
BANKS AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
Issuance of any type of guarantee by Indian
banks, AIFI and NBFCs relating to ECB is not
permitted. Further, financial intermediaries (viz.,
Indian banks, AIFI, or NBFC) shall not invest in
FCCB/ FCEB in any manner whatsoever.
PARKING OF ECB PROCEEDS
                                                      Parking          Parking
                                                      abroad           domestically
                                                       ECB
                                                      proceeds
                                                      meant for
                                                      Rupee
                                                      currency         expenditure
                                                      expenditure      should be           immediately for
                                                      can be           repatriated abroad credit to their
 ECB proceeds meant only for foreign                 parked           pending utilisation.Rupee
accounts with AD Category-I banks in
                                                      India.
                                                      invested in
                                                      the following
 Till utilisation, these funds can be                liquid assets-
 ECB borrowers are also allowed to park
                                                      ECB
                                                      proceeds in
                                                      term deposits Category-I banks
                                                      with AD other in India for
                                                      products      maximum not less 12 months
                                                      offered by    than AA (-) by   cumulatively.
a) deposits or Certificate of Deposit or              banks rated Standard and       These term
                                                      Poor/Fitch    deposits should
                                                      IBCA or Aa3 be kept in
                                                      by Moody's; unencumbered
b) Treasury bills and other monetary                  position.
instruments of one-year maturity having
minimum rating as indicated above and
c) deposits                                           with             foreign
branches/subsidiaries of Indian banks abroad.

Conversion Of ECB Into Equity
Conversion of ECBs, including those which are
matured but unpaid, into equity is permitted
subject to the following conditions:
i. The activity of the borrowing company shall be
covered under the automatic route for FDI or
approval route wherever applicable, for foreign
equity participation;
ii. The conversion, which should be with the
lender's consent and without any additional cost,
shall not result in breach of applicable sector cap
on the foreign equity holding; iii. Applicable
pricing guidelines for shares shall be complied
with; iv. Reporting requirements under ECB
framework shall be complied with;
v. If the borrower concerned has availed of other
credit facilities from the Indian banking system,
including overseas branches/subsidiaries, the
applicable prudential guidelines issued by the
Department of Banking Regulation of RBI,
including guidelines on restructuring shall be
complied with; and
vi. Consent of other lenders, if any, to the same
borrower shall be available or at least
information regarding conversions is exchanged
with other lenders of the borrower.

EXCHANGE RATE FOR CONVERSION OF
ECB DUES INTO EQUITY
For conversion of ECB dues into equity,
 Exchange rate prevailing on the date of the
agreement between the parties concerned for
such conversion OR
 Any lesser rate can be applied with a mutual
agreement with the ECB lender.
SECURITY FOR RAISING ECB
AD Category-I banks are permitted to allow
creation/cancellation of charge on immovable
assets, movable assets, financial securities and
issue of corporate and/or personal guarantees in
favour of overseas lender / security trustee, to
secure the ECB to be raised/ raised by the
borrower, subject to satisfying themselves that:
* the underlying ECB is in compliance with the
extant ECB guidelines,
* there exists a security clause in the Loan
Agreement requiring the ECB borrower to
create/cancel charge, in favour of overseas
lender/security trustee, on immovable
assets/movable assets/financial
securities/issuance of corporate and/or personal
guarantee, and
* NOC, as applicable, from the existing lenders
in India has been obtained in case of creation of
charge.
Once the aforesaid stipulations are met, the AD
Category-I bank may permit creation of charge
on immovable assets, movable assets, financial
securities and issue of corporate and/or personal
guarantees, during the currency of the ECB with
security co - terminating with underlying ECB,
subject to the following:
Creation of Charge on Immovable Assets:
The arrangement shall be subject to the
following:
* Such security shall be subject to provisions
contained in the FEM (Acquisition and Transfer
of Immovable Property in India) Regulation
2017.
* The permission should not be construed as a
permission to acquire immovable asset
(property) in India, by the overseas lender/
security trustee.
* In the event of enforcement / invocation of the
charge, the immovable asset/ property will have
to be sold only to a person resident in India and
the sale proceeds shall be repatriated to
liquidate the outstanding ECB.

Creation of Charge on Movable Assets: In the
event of enforcement/ invocation of the charge,
the claim of the lender, whether the lender takes
over the movable asset or otherwise, will be
restricted to the outstanding claim against the
ECB. Encumbered movable assets may also be
taken out of the country subject to getting 'No
Objection Certificate' from domestic
Creation of Charge over Financial Securities:
The arrangements may be permitted subject to
the following:
* Pledge of shares of the borrowing company
held by the promoters as well as in domestic
associate companies of the borrower is
permitted. Pledge on other financial securities,
viz. bonds and debentures, Government
Securities, Government Savings Certificates,
deposit receipts of securities and units of the UTI
or of any mutual funds, standing in the name of
ECB borrower/promoter, is also permitted.
* In addition, security interest over all current and
future loan assets and all current assets
including cash and cash equivalents, including
Rupee accounts of the borrower with ADs in
India, standing in the name of the
borrower/promoter, can be used as security for
ECB. The Rupee accounts of the
borrower/promoter can also be in the form of
escrow arrangement or debt service reserve
account.
* In case of invocation of pledge, transfer of
financial securities shall be in accordance with
the extant FDI/FII policy including provisions
relating to sectoral cap and pricing as applicable
read with the Foreign Exchange Management
(Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person
Resident outside India) Regulations, 2017, as
amended from time to time.

Issue of Corporate or Personal Guarantee:
The arrangement shall be subject to the
following:
* A copy of Board Resolution for the issue of
corporate guarantee for the company issuing
such guarantee, specifying name of the officials
authorised to execute such guarantees on behalf
of the company or in individual capacity should
be obtained.
* Specific requests from individuals to issue
personal guarantee indicating details of the ECB
should be obtained.
* Such security shall be subject to provisions
contained in the FEM (Guarantees) Regulations,
2000, as amended from time to time.
* ECB can be credit enhanced / guaranteed /
insured by overseas party/ parties only if it/ they
fulfil the criteria of recognised lender under
extant ECB guidelines.

PROCEDURE FOR RAISING ECB
The procedure for raising ECB under approval
route requires the borrowers to-
 Approach the RBI with an application in
prescribed format Form ECB for examination
through their AD Category-I bank.
 Such cases are considered keeping in view the
overall guidelines, macroeconomic situation and
merits of the specific proposals.
 ECB proposals received in the Reserve Bank
above certain threshold limit (refixed from time to
time) are placed before the Empowered
Committee set up by the RBI.
 The RBI takes a final decision taking into
account recommendation of the Empowered
Committee. Entities desirous to raise ECB under
the automatic route may approach an AD
Category-I bank with their proposal along with
duly filled in Form 83.

REPORTING REQUIREMENT
1. Loan Registration Number (LRN):
 Any draw-down in respect of an ECB as well as
payment of any fees / charges for raising an ECB
should happen only after obtaining the LRN from
RBI.
 Copies of loan agreement for raising ECB are
not required to be submitted to the RBI.
2. Changes in terms and conditions of ECB:
Permitted changes in ECB parameters should be
reported to the DSIM by submitting revised Form
83 at the earliest, in any case not later than 7
days from the changes effected. While
submitting revised Form 83 the changes should
be specifically mentioned in the communication.
3. Monthly Reporting of actual transactions:
The borrowers are required to report actual ECB
transactions through Form ECB 2 Return
through the AD Category I bank on monthly
basis so as to reach Department of Statistics
and Information Management within seven
working days from the close of month to which it
relates.
Changes, if any, in ECB parameters should also
be incorporated in Form ECB 2 Return.
4. Late Submission Fee (LSF) for delay in
reporting:
Any borrower, who is otherwise in compliance of
ECB guidelines, can regularise the delay in
reporting of drawdown of ECB proceeds before
obtaining LRN or delay in submission of Form
ECB 2 returns, by payment of prescribed late
submission fees.
5. Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for
Untraceable Entities:
The following SOP has to be followed by
designated AD Category-I banks in case of
untraceable entities who are found to be in
contravention of reporting provisions for ECB by
failing to submit prescribed returns under the
ECB framework, either physically or
electronically, for past eight quarters or more.
6. Any borrower who has raised ECB will be
treated as 'untraceable entity', if
entity/auditor(s)/director(s)/promoters of entity
are not reachable/responsive/reply in negative
over email/letters/phone for a period of not less
than 2 quarters with documented
communication/ reminders numbering 6 or more
and it fulfils both of the following conditions:
 Entity not found to be operative at the
registered office address as per records
available with the AD-Bank or not found to be
operative during the visit by the officials of the
AD-Bank or any other agencies authorised by
the AD-bank for the purpose;
 Entities have not submitted Statutory Auditor's
Certificate for last 2 years or more;

The followings actions are to be undertaken in
respect of 'untraceable entities':
 File Revised Form ECB, if required, and last
Form ECB 2 Return without certification from
company with 'UNTRACEABLE ENTITY' written
in bold on top. The outstanding amount will be
treated as written-off from external debt liability
of the country but may be retained by the lender
in its books for recovery through judicial/ non-
judicial means;
 No fresh ECB application by the entity should
be examined/processed by the AD bank;
 Directorate of Enforcement should be informed
whenever any entity is designated
'UNTRACEABLE ENTITY'; and
 No inward remittance or debt servicing will be
permitted under auto route.

ECB FACILITY FOR OIL MARKETING
COMPANIES
 Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies
(OMCs) can raise ECB for working capital
purposes with minimum average maturity period
of 3 years from all recognised lenders under the
automatic route without mandatory hedging and
individual limit requirements. raising ECB.
* Maturity: Minimum average maturity period will
be 3 years.
* Recognised lender: Lender / investor shall be a
resident of a FATF compliant country.

However, foreign branches/subsidiaries of Indian
banks and overseas entity in which
Indian entity has made overseas direct
investment as per the extant Overseas Direct
Investment Policy will not be considered as
recognised lenders under this framework.
* Forms: The borrowing can be in form of loans
or non-convertible, optionally convertible or
partially convertible preference shares.
* Currency: The borrowing should be
denominated in any freely convertible currency
or in Indian Rupees (INR) or a combination
thereof. In case of borrowing in INR, the
nonresident lender, should mobilise INR through
swaps/outright sale undertaken through an AD
Category-I bank in India.
* Amount: The borrowing per Start-up will be
limited to USD 3 million or equivalent per FY
either in INR or any convertible foreign currency
or a combination of both.
* All-in-cost: Shall be mutually agreed between
the borrower and the lender.
* End uses: For any expenditure in connection
with the business of the borrower.
* Conversion into equity: Conversion into equity
is freely permitted subject to Regulations
applicable for foreign investment in Start-ups.
* Security: The choice of security to be provided
to the lender is left to the borrowing entity.
Security can be in the nature of movable,
immovable, intangible assets (including patents,
intellectual property rights), financial securities,
etc. and shall comply with foreign direct
investment / foreign portfolio investment / or any
other norms applicable for foreign lenders /
entities holding such securities.
Further, issuance of corporate or personal
guarantee is allowed.
Guarantee issued by a non- resident(s) is
allowed only if such parties qualify as lender
under ECB for Start-ups. However, issuance of
guarantee, standby letter of credit, letter of
undertaking or letter of comfort by Indian banks,
all India Financial Institutions and NBFCs is not
permitted.
* Hedging: The overseas lender, in case of INR
denominated ECB, will be eligible to hedge its
INR exposure through permitted derivative
products with AD Category - I bank in India. The
lender can also access the domestic market
through branches/ subsidiaries of Indian banks
abroad or branches of foreign bank with Indian
presence on a back to back basis. Start-ups
raising ECB in foreign currency, whether having
natural hedge or not, are exposed to currency
risk due to exchange rate movements and hence
are advised to ensure that they have an
appropriate risk management policy to manage
potential risk arising out of ECB.
* Conversion rate: In case of borrowing in INR,
the foreign currency - INR conversion will be at
the market rate as on the date of agreement.
* Other Provisions: Other provisions like parking
of ECB proceeds, reporting arrangements,
powers delegated to AD banks, borrowing by
entities under investigation, conversion of ECB
into equity will be as included in the ECB
framework.

BORROWING BY ENTITIES UNDER
INVESTIGATION
 All entities against which investigation /
adjudication / appeal by the law enforcing
agencies for violation of any of the provisions of
the Regulations under FEMA pending, may raise
ECB as per the applicable norms, if they are
otherwise eligible.
 The borrowing entity shall inform about
pendency of investigation / adjudication / appeal
to the AD Category-I bank / RBI.



ECB BY ENTITIES UNDER RESTRUCTURING/
ECB FACILITY FOR REFINANCING
STRESSED ASSETS
 An entity which is under a restructuring
scheme/ corporate insolvency resolution process
can raise ECB only if specifically permitted
under the resolution plan.
 Eligible corporate borrowers who have availed
Rupee loans domestically for capital expenditure
in manufacturing and infrastructure sector and
which have been classified as SMA -2 or NPA
can avail ECB for repayment of these loans
under any one- time settlement with lenders.
 Lender banks are also permitted to sell,
through assignment, such loans to eligible ECB
lenders, provided, the resultant external
commercial borrowing complies with allin-cost,
minimum average maturity period and other
relevant norms of the ECB framework. Foreign
branches/ overseas subsidiaries of Indian banks
are not eligible to lend for the above purposes.
The applicable MAMP will have to be strictly
complied with under all circumstances.
Eligible borrowers under the ECB framework,
who are participating in the Corporate Insolvency
Resolution Process under Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016 as resolution applicants,
can raise ECB from all recognised lenders,
except foreign branches/subsidiaries of Indian
banks, for repayment of Rupee term loans of the
target company.


LESSON 5 FOREIGN TRADE POLICY AND
PROCEDURE
India's Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) has,
conventionally, been formulated for five years at
a time and reviewed annually. The focus of the
FTP has been to provide a framework of rules
and procedures for exports and imports and a
set of incentives for promoting exports. The FTP
for 2015-2020 seeks to achieve the following
objectives:
1. To provide a stable and sustainable policy
environment for foreign trade in merchandise
and services;
2. To link rules, procedures and incentives for
exports and imports with other initiatives such as
"Make in India", "Digital India" and "Skills India"
to create an "Export Promotion Mission? for
India;
3. To promote the diversification of India's export
basket by helping various sectors of the Indian
economy to gain global competitiveness with a
view to promoting exports;
4. To create an architecture for India's global
trade engagement with a view to expanding its
markets and better integrating with major
regions, thereby increasing the demand for
India's products and contributing to the
government's flagship "Make in India" initiative;
5. To provide a mechanism for regular appraisal
in order to rationalise imports and reduce the
trade imbalance. Exports should not merely be a
function of marketable surplus but should also
reflect an enhancement of economic capacity
and development.

Foreign Trade Policy envisages:
* Employment creation in both manufacturing
and services through the generation of foreign
trade opportunities
* Zero defect products with a focus on quality
and standards;
* A stable agricultural trade policy encouraging
the import of raw material where required and
export of processed products;
* A focus on higher value addition and
technology infusion;
* Investment in agriculture overseas to produce
raw material for the Indian industry;
* Lower tariffs on inputs and raw materials; and
* Development of trade infrastructure and
provision of production and export incentives
Exports and Imports - 'Free', unless regulated
Exports and Imports shall be 'Free' except when
regulated by way of 'prohibition', 'restriction' or
'exclusive trading through State Trading
Enterprises (STEs)' as laid down in Indian Trade
Classification (Harmonised System) [ITC (HS)] of
Exports and Imports.
Further, there are some items which are 'free' for
import/export, but subject to conditions
stipulated in other Acts or in law for the time
being in force.

Indian Trade Classification (Harmonised System)
[ITC (HS)] of Exports and Imports
* ITC (HS) is a compilation of codes for all
merchandise / goods for export/ import. Goods
are classified based on their group or sub-group
at 2/4/6/8 digits.
* ITC (HS) is aligned at 6 digit level with
international Harmonized System goods
nomenclature maintained by World Customs
Organization However, India maintains national
Harmonized System of goods at 8 digit level.

Importer-Exporter Code (IEC) Number/E-IEC
 An IEC is a 10 digit number allotted to a person
that is mandatory for undertaking
 any export/import activities. Now the facility for
IEC in electronic form or e-IEC has also been
operationalised. Application for obtaining IEC
can be filed manually and submitting the form in
the office of Regional Authority (RA) of DGFT.
Alternatively, Exporters / Importers shall file an
application in ANF 2A format for grant of e-IEC.
 Only one IEC is permitted against on PAN. If
any PAN card holder has more than one
 IEC, the extra IECs shall be disabled.
 No export or import shall be made by any
person without an IEC number unless
specifically exempted. An IEC number shall be
granted on application by competent authority in
accordance with specified procedure.
 The following categories of importers of exports
have been exempted from obtaining IEC
number;
 Ministries/ Departments of the Central or State
Government.
 Persons importing or exporting goods for
personal use for personal use not connected
with trade or manufacture or agriculture.
 Persons importing /exporting goods from/to
Nepal provided the CIF value of a single
consignment does not exceed Indian Rs.25, 000.
 Person importing/exporting goods from/to
Myanmar through Indo- Myanmar border areas
provided the CIF value of a single consignment
does not exceed Indian Rs.25, 000.
 The FTP allows the following permanent IEC
numbers to be used by the categories of
importers / exporters mentioned against them for
import/ export purposes.

Mandatory Documents for Export/Import of
Goods from/into India Mandatory documents
required for export of goods from India:

* Bill of Lading/Airway Bill
* Commercial Invoice cum Packing List*
* Shipping Bill/Bill of Export
Mandatory documents required for import of
goods into India
* Bill of Entry
restrictions/policy conditions or require NOC
from the regulatory authority concerned.
compliance

Principles of Restrictions
a) Protection of public morals;
b) Protection of human, animal or plant life or
health;
c) Protection of patents, trademarks and
copyrights, and the prevention of deceptive
practices;
d) Prevention of use of prison labour;
e) Protection of national treasures of artistic,
historic or archaeological value;
f) Conservation of exhaustible natural resources;
g) Protection of trade of fissionable material or
material from which they are derived;
h) Prevention of traffic in arms, ammunition and
implements of war.


Exports from India Schemes
The objective of the Export from India Schemes
is to provide rewards to exporters to offset
infrastructural inefficiencies and associated costs
involved and to provide exporters a level playing
field.
There shall be following two schemes for exports
of Merchandise and Services respectively:
1. Merchandise Exports from India Scheme
(MEIS).
2. Service Exports from India Scheme (SEIS).

Nature of Rewards
Duty Credit Scrips shall be granted as rewards
under MEIS and SEIS. The Duty Credit Scrips
and goods imported / domestically procured
against them shall be freely transferable.
The Duty Credit Scrips can be used for :
* Payment of Customs Duties for import of inputs
or good
* Payment of excise duties on domestic
procurement of inputs or goods, including capital
goods as per Department of Revenue (DoR)
notification.
* Payment of service tax on procurement of
services as per DoR notification.
* Payment of Customs Duty and fee as per
Foreign Trade Policy.

Merchandise Exports from India Scheme
(MEIS).
The objective of MEIS is to offset infrastructural
inefficiencies and associated costs involved in
export of goods/products, which are
produced/manufactured in India, especially
those having high export intensity, employment
potential and thereby enhancing India's export
competitiveness.

Entitlement under MEIS:
The basis of calculation of reward would be on
realized. FOB value of exports in free foreign
exchange, or on FOB value of exports as given
in the Shipping Bills in free foreign exchange,
whichever is less, unless otherwise specified.

Export of goods through courier or foreign post
office using e-commerce
i. Exports of goods through courier or foreign
post office using e-commerce, of FOB value upto
Rs. 25000 per consignment shall be entitled for
rewards under MEIS.
ii. If the value of exports using e-commerce
platform is more than Rs 25000 per consignment
then MEIS reward would be limited to FOB value
of Rs.25000 only.
iii. Such goods can be exported in manual mode
through Foreign Post Offices at New Delhi,
Mumbai and Chennai.
iv. Export of such goods under Courier
Regulations shall be allowed manually on pilot
basis through Airports at Delhi, Mumbai and
Chennai as per appropriate amendments in
regulations to be made by Department of
Revenue. Department of Revenue shall fast
track the implementation of Electronic Data
Interchange (EDI) mode at courier terminals.

Service Exports from India Scheme (SEIS)
The objective of SEISis to encourage export of
notified Services from India.
Eligibilty -
Service Providers of notified services, located in
India, shall be rewarded under SEIS, subject to
conditions as may be notified. Following
Services shall be eligible:
i. Supply of a 'service' from India to any other
country
ii. Supply of a 'service' from India to service
consumer(s) of any other country; iii. Such
service provider should have minimum net free
foreign exchange earnings of US$15,000 in
preceding financial year to be eligible for Duty
Credit Scrip. For Individual Service Providers
and sole proprietorship, such minimum net free
foreign exchange earnings criteria would be
US$10,000 in preceding financial year.
iv. Net Foreign exchange earnings for the
scheme are defined as under:
Net Foreign Exchange = Gross Earnings of
Foreign Exchange minus Total expenses /
payment / remittances of Foreign Exchange by
the IEC holder, relating to service sector in the
Financial year.

Status Holder
a) Status Holders are business leaders who
have excelled in international trade and have
successfully contributed to country's foreign
trade. Status Holders are expected to not only
contribute towards India's exports but also
provide guidance and handholding to new
entrepreneurs.
b) All exporters of goods, services and
technology having an import-export code (IEC)
number shall be eligible for recognition as a
status holder. Status recognition depends upon
export performance. An applicant shall be
categorized as status holder upon achieving
export performance during current and previous
two financial years, as indicated in Forei Trade
Policy. The export performance will be counted
on the basis of FOB value of export earnings in
free foreign exchange.
c) For deemed export, FOB value of exports in
Indian Rupees shall be converted in US$ at the
exchange rate notified by CBEC, as applicable
on 1st April of each Financial Year.
d) For granting status, export performance is
necessary in at least two out of three years.

Privileges of Status Holders
A Status Holder shall be eligible for privileges as
under:
a) Authorisation and Customs Clearances for
both imports and exports may be granted on self-
declaration basis;
b) Input-Output norms may be fixed on priority
within 60 days by the Norms Committee;
c) Exemption from furnishing of Bank Guarantee
for Schemes under FTP, unless specified
otherwise anywhere in FTP or Hand Book of
Procedure (HBP);
d) Exemption from compulsory negotiation of
documents through banks. Remittance
/receipts, however, would be received through
banking channels;
e) Two star and above Export houses shall be
permitted to establish Export Warehouses as per
Department of Revenue guidelines.
f) The status holders would be entitled to
preferential treatment and priority in handling of
their consignments by the concerned agencies.
g) Manufacturer exporters who are also Status
Holders shall be eligible to self-certify their
goods as originating from India as per of Hand
Book of Procedures.
h) Status holders shall be entitled to export freely
exportable items on free of cost basis for export
promotion subject to an annual limit of Rs.10
lakh or 2% of average annual export realization
during preceding three licencing years whichever
is higher.

Duty Exemption/Remission Schemes
Duty Exemption / Remission Schemes enable
duty free import of inputs for export production,
including replenishment of input or duty
remission.




                                                       Advance
                                                       Authorisation
                                                       Duty Free
                                                       Import        Duty Drawback
                                                       Authorisation Scheme

A. Advance Authorisation
Authorisation is issued to allow duty free import
of input, which is physically incorporated in
export product (making normal allowance for
wastage). In addition, fuel, oil, catalyst which is
consumed / utilised in the process of production
of export product, may also be allowed.
Advance Authorisation is issued for inputs in
relation to resultant product, on the following
basis:
* As per Standard Input Output Norms (SION)
notified (available in Hand Book of Procedures);
OR
* On the basis of self-declaration as per of
Handbook of Procedures.

Value Addition
sector for which value addition is prescribed in of
FTP) shall be:-
A-B
VA =                                                x 100, where
B
A = FOB value of export realized / FOR value of
supply received.

Export Obligation
i. Period for fulfilment of export obligation under
Advance Authorisation shall be 18 months from
the date of issue of Authorisation or as notified
by DGFT.
ii. In cases of supplies to turnkey projects in
India under deemed export category or turnkey
projects abroad, the Export Obligation period
shall be co-terminus with contracted duration of
the project execution or 18 months whichever is
more.
iii. Export Obligation for items falling in
categories of defense, military store, aerospace
and nuclear energy shall be 24 months from the
date of issue of authorization or co- terminus
with contracted duration of the export order
whichever is more.

B. Duty Free Import Authorisation Scheme
(DFIA)
a) Duty Free Import Authorisation is issued to
allow duty free import of inputs. In addition,
import of oil and catalyst which is consumed /
utilised in the process of production of export
product, may also be allowed.
b) Provisions of Accounting Imputes,
Importability / Exportability of items that are
Prohibited/Restricted/STE, Domestic Sourcing of
Inputs, Currency for Realisation of Export
Proceeds and Re-import of exported goods
under Duty Exemption / Remission
Scheme of FTP shall be applicable to DFIA also

Schemes for Exporters of Gems and Jewellery
Import of Input
Exporters of gems and Jewellery can import /
procure duty free input for manufactureof export
product.
Items of Export
Following items, if exported, would be eligible:
* Gold jewellery, including partly processed
jewellery and articles including medallions and
coins (excluding legal tender coins), whether
plain or studded, containing gold of 8 carats and
above;
* Silver jewellery including partly processed
jewellery, silverware, silver strips and articles
including medallions and coins (excluding legal
tender coins and any engineering goods)
containing more than 50% silver by weight;
* Platinum jewellery including partly processed
jewellery and articles including medallions and
coins (excluding legal tender coins and any
engineering goods) containing more than 50%
platinum by weight.
Export Promotion Capital Goods Scheme
Objective
The objective of the Export Promotion Capital
Goods (EPCG) Scheme is to facilitate import of
capital goods for producing quality goods and
services to enhance India's export
competitiveness.

EPCG Scheme
a) EPCG Scheme allows import of capital goods
for pre- production, production and post-
production at Zero customs duty. Alternatively,
the Authorisation holder may also procure
Capital Goods from indigenous sources. Capital
goods for the purpose of the EPCG scheme
shall include:
Capital Goods including in Completely Knocked
down (CKD)/ Semi- Knocked Down (SKD)
condition thereof;
Computer software systems;
Spares, moulds, dies, jigs, fixtures, tools &
refractories for initial lining and spare
refractories; and
Catalysts for initial charge plus one subsequent
charge.
b) Import of capital goods for Project Imports
notified by Central Board of Excise and Customs
is also permitted under EPCG Scheme.
Import under EPCG Scheme shall be subject to
an export obligation equivalent to 6 times of duty
saved on capital goods, to be fulfilled in 6 years
reckoned from date of issue.


Authorisation
Authorisation shall be valid for import for 18
months from the date of issue of Authorisation.

Obligation on the part of importer/ exporter
Rule 11 of the Foreign Trade (Regulation) Rules,
1993, requires that on the importation into, or
exportation out of, any customs ports of any
goods, whether liable to duty or not,
i. The owner of such goods shall in the Bill of
Entry or the Shipping Bill or any other documents
prescribed under the Customs Act, 1962 state
the value, quality and description of such goods
to the best of his knowledge and belief
ii. In case of exportation of goods, certify that the
quality and specification of the goods as stated
in those documents, are in accordance with the
terms of the export contract entered into with the
buyer or consignee and shall subscribe a
declaration of the truth of such statement at the
foot of such Bill of Entry or Shipping Bill or any
other documents.
Violation of this provision renders the exporter
liable for penal action.
iii. Section 8 of the Act empowers the Director
General of Foreign Trade or any other person
authorized by him to suspend or cancel the
Importer Exporter Code Number for the reasons
as given therein.
iv. Section 9(2) of the Act empowers the Director
General of Foreign Trade or an officer authorised
by him to refuse to grant or renew a license,
certificate, scrip or any other instrument
bestowing financial or fiscal benefit granted
under the Act.

v. Section 9(4) empowers the Director General
of Foreign Trade or the officer authorized by him
to suspend or cancel any License, certificate,
scrip or any instrument bestowing financial or
fiscal benefit granted under the Act.
vi. Section 11(2) of the Act provides for
imposition of fiscal penalty in cases where a
person makes or abets or attempts to make any
import or export in contravention of any provision
of the Act, any Rules or Orders made there
under or the Foreign Trade Policy.

Export Oriented Units (EOUs), Electronics
Hardware Technology Parks (EHTPs), Software
Technology Parks (STPs) And Bio- Technology
Parks (BTPs) Introduction
Units undertaking to export their entire
production of goods and services (except
permissible sales in DTA), may be set up under
the Export Oriented Unit (EOU) Scheme,
Electronics Hardware Technology Park (EHTP)
Scheme, Software Technology Park (STP)
Scheme or Bio Technology Park (BTP) Scheme
for manufacture of goods, including repair, re-
making, reconditioning, reengineering, rendering
of services, development of software, agriculture
including agroprocessing, aquaculture, animal
husbandry, bio-technology, floriculture,
horticulture, pisciculture, viticulture, poultry and
sericulture. Trading units are not covered under
these schemes.

Objectives

These schemes are to promote exports,
enhance foreign exchange earnings, attract
investment for export production and
employment generation.

Export and Import of Goods
a) An EOU / EHTP / STP / BTP unit may export
all kinds of goods and services except items that
are prohibited in ITC (HS).
b) Export of Special Chemicals, Organisms,
Materials, Equipment and Technologies
(SCOMET) shall be subject to fulfilment of the
conditions indicated in ITC (HS).
c) In respect of an EOU, permission to export a
prohibited item may be considered, by Board of
Approval (BOA), on a case to case basis,
provided such raw materials are imported and
there is no procurement of such raw material
from Domestic Tariff Area (DTA).
d) Procurement and supply of export promotion
material like brochure / literature, pamphlets,
hoardings, catalogues, posters etc up to a
maximum value limit of 1.5% of FOB value of
previous years exports shall also be allowed.
e) An EOU / EHTP / STP / BTP unit may import
and / or procure, from Domestic Tariff Area or
bonded warehouses in Domestic Tariff Area /
international exhibition held in India, without
payment of duty, all types of goods, including
capital goods.
f) EOU / EHTP / STP / BTP units may import /
procure from Domestic Tariff Area, without
payment of duty, certain specified goods for
creating a central facility
g) Details of procured / imported goods and
articles manufactured by the EOU will be listed
separately in the export documents. In such
cases, value of procured / imported goods will
not be taken into account for calculation of NFE
and DTA sale entitlement. Such procured /
imported goods shall not be allowed to be sold in
DTA. BOA may also specify any other
conditions.

Letter of Permission / Letter of Intent and Legal
Undertaking
a) On approval, a Letter of Permission (LoP) /
Letter of Intent (LoI) shall be issued by DC
/ designated officer to EOU/ EHTP / STP / BTP
unit. LoP / LoI shall have an initial validity of 2
years to enable the Unit to construct the plant &
install the machinery and by this time the unit
should have commenced production.
b) In case the unit is not able to commence
production in initial validity of 2 years, an
extension of one year may be given by the DC
for valid reasons to be recorded in writing.
Subsequent extension of one year may be given
by the Unit Approval Committee
c) Subject to condition that two-thirds of activities
including construction, relating to the setting up
of the Unit are complete and Chartered
Engineer's certificate to this effect is submitted
by the Unit.
d) Further extension, if necessary, will be
granted by the Board of Approval. Once unit
commences production, LoP / LoI issued shall
be valid for a period of 5 years for its activities.
This period may be extended further by DC for a
period of 5 years at a time. LoP / LoI issued to
EOU / EHTP / STP / BTP units by concerned
authority, subject to compliance of provision
pertaining to export and import of goods under
EOU / EHTP / STP / BTP Scheme above, would
be construed as an Authorisation for all
purposes.

Investment Criteria
Only projects having a minimum investment of
Rs. 1 Crore in plant & machinery shall be
considered for establishment as EOUs.
However, this shall not apply to existing units,
units in EHTP / STP / BTP, and EOUs in
Handicrafts / Agriculture / Floriculture /
Aquaculture / Animal Husbandry / Information
Technology, Services, Brass Hardware and
Handmade jewellery sectors.
BOA may allow establishment of EOUs with a
lower investment criteria.

Application and Approvals
i. Applications for setting up of units under EOU
scheme shall be approved or rejected by the
Units Approval Committee within 15 days as per
criteria indicated in Handbook of Procedures
(HBP).
ii. In other cases, approval may be granted by
BOA set up for this purpose as indicated in HBP.
iii. Proposals for setting up EOU requiring
industrial licence may be granted approval by
DC after clearance of proposal by BOA and
Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion
(DIPP) within 45 days.
iv. Applications for conversion into an EOU /
EHTP / STP / BTP unit from existing DTA units,
having an investment of Rs. 50 crores and
above in plant and machinery or exporting Rs.
50 crores and above annually, shall be placed
before BOA for a decision.

Entitlement for supplies from the DTA
a) Supplies from DTA to EOU / EHTP / STP /
BTP units will be regarded as "deemed exports"
and DTA supplier shall be eligible for relevant
entitlements of FTP, besides discharge of export
obligation, if any, on the supplier.
b) In addition, EOU / EHTP / STP / BTP units
shall be entitled to following:
* Reimbursement of Central Sales Tax (CST) on
goods manufactured in India. Simple interest @
6% per annum will be payable on delay in refund
of CST, if the case is not settled within 30 days
of receipt of complete application
* Exemption from payment of Central Excise
Duty on goods procured from DTA on goods
manufactured in India.
* Reimbursement of duty paid on fuel procured
from Domestic Oil Companies / Depots of
Domestic Oil Public Sector Undertakings as per
drawback rate notified by DGFT from time to
time. Reimbursement of additional duty of excise
levied on fuel under the Finance Acts would also
be admissible.
* CENVAT Credit on service tax paid.

Other Entitlements
Other entitlements of EOU / EHTP / STP / BTP
units are as under:
a) Exemption from industrial licensing for
manufacture of items reserved for SSI sector.
b) Export proceeds will be realized within nine
months.
c) Units will be allowed to retain 100% of its
export earnings in the EEFC account
d) Unit will not be required to furnish bank
guarantee at the time of import or going for job
work in DTA, where:
i. the unit has turnover of Rs. 5 crore or above;
ii. the unit is in existence for at least three years;
and
iii. the unit:
* has achieved positive NFE / export obligation
wherever applicable;
* has not been issued a show cause notice or a
confirmed demand, during the preceding 3
years, on grounds other than procedural
violations
Customs Act, the Central Excise Act, the Foreign
Trade (Development &
Regulation) Act, the Foreign Exchange
Management Act, the Finance Act, 1994
covering Service Tax or any allied Acts or the
rules made thereunder, on account of fraud /
collusion / wilful mis statement / suppression of
facts or contravention of any of the provisions
thereof;
e) 100% FDI investment permitted through
automatic route similar to SEZ units.
f) Units shall pay duty on the goods produced or
manufactured and cleared into DTA on monthly
basis in the manner prescribed in the Central
Excise Rules.
g) The Units Approval Committee may consider
on a case-to-case basis request for sharing of
infrastructural facilities among


Inter Unit Transfer
a) Transfer of manufactured goods from one
EOU / EHTP / STP / BTP unit to another EOU /
EHTP / STP / BTP unit is allowed with prior
intimation to concerned Development
Commissioners of the transferor and transferee
units as well as concerned Customs authorities.
b) Capital goods may be transferred or given on
loan to other EOU / EHTP / STP / BTP / SEZ
units, with prior intimation to concerned DC and
Customs authorities.
c) Goods supplied by one unit of EOU / EHTP /
STP / BTP to another unit shall be treated as
imported goods for second unit for payment of
duty, on DTA sale by second unit.
d) In respect of a group of EOUs / EHTPs / STPs
/ BTP Units which source inputs centrally in order
to obtain bulk discount and / or reduce cost of
transportation and other logistics cost and / or to
maintain effective supply chain, inter unit transfer
of goods and services may be permitted on a
case-to-case basis by the Unit Approval
Committee.
Sale of Unutilized Material
a) In case an EOU / EHTP / STP / BTP unit is
unable to utilize goods and services, imported or
procured from DTA, it may be:
* Transferred to another EOU / EHTP / STP /
BTP / SEZ unit; or
* Disposed of in DTA with approval of Customs
authorities on payment of applicable duties and
submission of import authorization; or ?
Exported.
b) Capital goods and spares that have become
obsolete / surplus, may either be exported,
transferred to another EOU / EHTP / STP / BTP /
SEZ unit or disposed of in DTA on payment of
applicable duties.
c) Benefit of depreciation, as applicable, will be
available in case of disposal in DTA only when
the unit has achieved positive NFE taking into
consideration the depreciation allowed.


Exit from EOU Scheme
i. With approval of Development Commissioner,
an EOU may opt out of scheme. Such exit shall
be subject to payment of Excise and Customs
duties and industrial policy in force. ii. If unit has
not achieved obligations, it shall also be liable to
penalty at the time of exit. iii. An EOU / EHTP /
STP / BTP unit may also be permitted by
Development Commissioner to exit from the
scheme at any time on payment of duty on
capital goods under the prevailing EPCG
Scheme for DTA Units. This will be subject to
fulfilment of positive NFE criteria under EOU
scheme, eligibility criteria under EPCG scheme
and standard conditions indicated in Hand Book
of Procedure.
iv. Unit proposing to exit out of EOU scheme
shall intimate DC and Customs and Central
Excise authorities in writing. After payment of
duty and clearance of all dues, unit shall obtain
"No Dues Certificate" from Customs and Central
Excise authorities. On the basis of "No Dues
Certificate" so issued by the Customs and
Central Excise authorities, unit shall apply to
Development Commissioner for final de-bonding.
v. An EOU / EHTP / STP / BTP unit may also be
permitted by DC to exit under Advance
Authorization as one time option. This will be
subject to fulfilment of positive NFE criteria.

Conversion
* Existing DTA units may also apply for
conversion into an EOU / EHTP / STP / BTP unit.
* Existing EHTP / STP units may also apply for
conversion / merger to EOU unit and vice- versa.
In such cases, units will remain in bond and avail
exemptions in duties and taxes as applicable.

Monitoring of NFE
Performance of EOU / EHTP / STP / BTP units
shall be monitored by Units Approval Committee
as per guidelines in HBP.

Export through Exhibitions / Export Promotion
Tours / Showrooms Abroad / Duty Free
Development Commissioner. beads and articles.
agents.
Export / Import by Post / Courier
Goods including free samples, may be exported /
imported by airfreight or through foreign post
office or through courier, as per Customs
procedure.


Approval of EHTP / STP
In case of units under EHTP / STP schemes,
necessary approval / permission under relevant
paras of this Chapter shall be granted by officer
designated by Ministry of Communication and
Information Technology, Department of
Electronics & Information
Technology, instead of Development
Commissioner, and by Inter Ministerial Standing
Committee (IMSC) instead of Board of Approval.

Approval of BTP
Bio-Technology Parks (BTP) would be notified by
DGFT on recommendations of Department of
Biotechnology. In case of units in BTP,
necessary approval / permission under relevant
provisions of this chapter will be granted by
designated officer of
Departmentof Biotechnology.

Warehousing Facilities
An EOU which intends to set up warehousing
facilities outside the EOU premises and outside
the jurisdiction of Development Commissioner,
at a place near to the port of export, to reduce
lead time for delivery of goods overseas and to
address unpredictability of supply orders, is
permitted to do so subject to the provisions
related to export warehousing as per terms and
conditions of Notifications issued by the
Department of Revenue.

Quality Complaints and Trade Disputes
Objective
Exporters need to project a good image of the
country abroad to promote exports. Maintaining
an enduring relationship with foreign buyers is of
utmost importance, and complaints or trade
disputes, whenever they arise, need to be settled
amicably as soonas possible. Importers too may
have grievances as well. To resolve such
complaints or trade disputes and to create
confidence in the business environment of the
country, a mechanism is being laid down to
address such complaints and disputes in an
amicable way.

Quality Complaints/ Trade Disputes
The following type of complaints may be
considered:
a) Complaints received from foreign buyers in
respect of poor quality of the products supplied
by exporters from India;
b) Complaints of importers against foreign
suppliers in respect of quality of the products
supplied; and
c) Complaints of unethical commercial dealings
categorized mainly as non-supply/ partial supply
of goods after confirmation of order; supplying
goods other than the ones as agreed upon; non-
payment; non-adherence to delivery schedules,
etc.

1. Committee on Quality complaints and Trade
Disputes (CQCTD)
To deal effectively with the increasing number of
complaints and disputes, a 'Committee on
Quality Complaints and Trade Disputes'
(CQCTD) will be constituted in the 22 offices of
the Regional Authority(RA's) of DGFT.
2. Composition of the CQCTD
The CQCTD would be constituted under the
Chairpersonship of the Head of Office. The
CQCTD may comprise of the following members:
* Additional DGFT/Joint DGFT/ (H.O.O):
Chairperson
* Representative of Bureau of India Standard
(BIS): Member
                                                  Export
                                                  Development
* Representative of Agricultural and Processed Authority:
Food Products                                     Member
* Representative of the Branch Manager of the
concerned Bank: Member
* Representative of Federation of Indian
Exporter Organisation / and OR Export
Promotion Council: Member
* Representative of Export Inspection Agency:
Member
* Nominee of Director of Industries of State
Government: Member
* Nominee of Development Commissioner of
MSME: Member
* Officer as nominated by Chairperson: Member
Secretary
* Any other agency, as co-opted by Chairperson:
Member.

3. Functions of CQCTD
The Committee (CQCTD) will be responsible for
enquiring and investigating into all Quality
related complaints and other trade related
complaints falling under the jurisdiction of the
respective RAs. It will take prompt and effective
steps to redress and resolve the grievances of
the importers, exporters and overseas buyers,
preferably within three months of receipt of the
complaint

Proceedings under CQCTD
CQCTD proceedings are only reconciliatory in
nature and the aggrieved party, whether the
foreign buyer or the Indian importer, is free to
pursue any legal recourse against the other
erring party.


Lesson 6: Law relating to Special Economic
Zones


Salient features of the Act
The salient features of Special Economic Zone
Ac 2005 are as follows:
* Matters dealing with setting up of special
Economic Zone and units there-in
* Matters dealing with off shore banking units
and units in international financial services
centre in SEZ
* Single window clearance mechanism at zone
level
* Fiscal regime / scenario for developers of
Special Economic Zone and units
* Providing authority for each SEZ granting them
administrative autonomy
* Setting up special courts to ensure faster
settlement of cases and speedy investigation in
equation to offences committed in Special
Economic Zones.

Who can set up SEZs?
Any private/public/joint sector or State
Government or its agencies can set up Special
Economic Zone (SEZ).
Step by Step Procedure
1. According to SEZ Act 2005, a Special
Economic Zone can be established either jointly
or severally by the Central Government, State
Government, or any other person involve in the
manufacturing of goods. Even a foreign
company can also set up SEZ in India.
2. After identifying the proper area a person
wishing to establish a SEZ unit may make a
proposal to the State Government
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (2), any person, who intends to set up a
Special Economic Zone, may, after identifying
the area, at his option, make a proposal directly
to the Board for the purpose of setting up the
Special Economic Zone:
4. In case, a State Government intends to set up
a Special Economic Zone, it may after choosing
the area, forward the proposal directly to the
Board of Approval for the purpose of setting up
the Special Economic Zone:
5. Every proposal under sub-sections (2) to (4)
shall be made in such form and manner
containing such particulars as may be
prescribed.
6. The State Government may, on receipt of the
proposal made under sub-section (2), forward
the same together with its recommendations to
the Board within a fix period as may be
prescribed.

7. Without prejudice to the provisions contained
in subsection (8), the Board may, after receipt of
the proposal under sub-section (2) to (4),
approve the proposal subject to such terms and
conditions as it may deem fit to impose, or
modify or reject the proposal.
8. The Central Government may prescribe the
following requirement for establishment of a
Special Economic Zone, namely:-
a. The minimum area of land and other terms
and conditions subject to which the
Board shall approve, modify or reject any
proposal received by it under sub-section
(2) to (4) ; and
b. The terms and conditions, subject to which the
Developer shall undertake the authorised
operations and his obligations and entitlements.
Provided that different minimum are of land and
other terms and conditions referred to in clause
(a) may be prescribed by the Central
Government for a class or classes of Special
Economic Zones.
9. If the Board,-
* Approves without any modification, the
proposal received under sub-section (2) to (4), it
shall communicate the same to the Central
Government;
* Approves with modifications the proposal
received under sub-section (2) to (4), it shall,
communicate such modifications to the person
or the State Government concerned and if such
modifications have been accepted by such
person or the State Government, the Board shall
communicate the approval to the Central
Government;
* Rejects the proposal, received under sub-
section (2) to (4), it shall record the reasons
therefore and communicate the rejection to the
Central Government which shall intimate to the
State Government or the person concerned.

10. The Central Government shall, on receipt of
communication under clause (a) or clause (b) of
sub-section (9), grant, within such time as may
be prescribed, a letter of approval on such terms
and conditions and obligations and entitlements
as may be approved by the Board, to the
Developer, being the person or the State
Government concerned:
Provided that the Central Government may, on
the basis of approval of the Board, approve more
than one Developer in a Special Economic Zone
in cases where one Developer does not have in
his possession the minimum area of contiguous
land, as may be prescribed, for setting up a
Special Economic Zone and in such cases, each
Developer shall be considered as a Developer in
respect of the land in his possession.
11. Any person who, or a State Government
which, intends to provide any infrastructure
facilities in the identified area referred to in sub-
section (2) to (4), or undertake any authorised
operation may, after entering into an agreement
with the Developer referred to in sub-section
(10), make a proposal for the same to the Board
for its approval and the provisions of subsection
(5) and sub-sections (7) to (10) shall, as far as
may be, apply to the said proposal made by
such person or State Government.
12. Every person or a State Government referred
to in subsection (11), whose proposal has been
approved by the Board and who, or which, has
been granted letter of approval by the Central
Government, shall be considered as a Co-
Developer of the Special Economic Zone.
13. Subject to the provisions of this section and
the letter of approval granted to a Developer, the
Developer may allocate space or built up area or
provide infrastructure services to the approved
units in accordance with the agreement entered
into by him with the entrepreneurs of such Units.

The following guidelines should be considered
by the C.G. while notifying any area as a SEZ or
an area to be included into SEZ and in
discharging its functions under the Act. The
guidelines are as follows:
Generation of additional economic activity;
Promotion of exports of goods and services;
Creation of employment Opportunity;
Promotion of investment from domestic and
foreign sources;
Development of infrastructure facilities; and
Maintenance of sovereignty and integrity of
India, the security of the State and friendly
relations with foreign States

Processing and Non Processing Areas (Section
6)
Central Govt. or any specified authority may
demarcate the area falling within the SEZ as
a) The processing area for setting up Units for
activities, being the manufacture of goods, or
rendering of services.
b) The area exclusively for trading or
warehousing purposes; or
c) The non- processing areas for activities other
than those specified under (a) or (b) above.

Exemption from taxes, duties or CESS (Section
7)
All the goods / services exported out, or imported
into, or procured from the Domestic Tariff Area,
by a unit or Developer in SEZ from the payment
of taxes, duties or CESS underall enactments
specified in the 1st schedule. The enactment
specified in the first schedule generally relate to
levy and payment of CESS

Constitution of Board of Approval (Section 8)
Central Govt. may constitute by notification, the
Board of Approval within 15 days of the
commencement of the Act. This Section also
provides for composition of Board, term of office
of
Members, co-option of certain persons as
members of the Board, its meeting and quorum,
etc,

Duties, power and functions of Board of
Approval (Section 9)
Under this section, the board has a duty to
promote and ensure orderly development of the
SEZ.
The power and duty of the board area.
a) Granting of approval or rejecting proposal or
modifying such proposals for establishment of
the SEZ.
b) Granting approval of authorised operations to
be carried out in SEZ.
c) Granting of approval or rejecting proposal for
providing infrastructure facilities in a SEZ or
modifying such proposals;
d) Granting, a licence to an Industrial
undertaking referred to in sec 3(d) of IDR act, if
such undertaking is established, as a whole or
part thereof, or proposed to be established, in a
SEZ.
e) Disposing of appeals preferred under sec
15(4) and section 16(4) of the Act,
f) Performing such other functions as may be
assigned to it by the central Govt.

Suspension of letter of approval and transfer of
SEZ in certain cases
According to Section 10 the Board has a power
to suspend the letter of approval granted to the
Developer
In the following Circumstances the Board may
order the suspension
a) The developer is unable to discharge the
functions or perform the duties imposed on him;
b) The developer has persistently defaulted in
complying with the directions of the board;
c) The developer has violated the term and
conditions of the letter;
d) The financial position of the developer is such
that he is unable to discharge the duties and
obligation imposed on him by the letter of
approval.
Before such suspension 3 months' notice should
be given by the board, in writing stating the
grounds on which it proposes to suspend the
letter of approval, and should also consider any
cause shown by the developer within the period
of that notice, against the proposed suspension.
Provided further that alternatively, the board may
permit the licence of approval to remain in force
subject to further terms and conditions as it
thinks fit. Such terms and conditions will be
binding on the developer

Development commissioner and his Functions
C.G. may appoint the development
commissioner for one or more SEZ and such
Officer and employees to assist every
Development Commissioner. (Section 11)
The development commissioner should take
following steps to ensure speedy development of
the SEZ and promotion of exports (Section 12)-
* Should guide the entrepreneur for setting up of
Units in the SEZ.
* Should ensure and take suitable steps for
effective promotion of exports from the SEZ.
                                                     make proper
                                                     co-ordination
* Should                                             with           the   central Govt. or State
                                                     Govt.
                                                     departments
                                                     concerned or
                                                     agencies with
                                                     respect to, or
                                                     for above
                                                     purposes; ?
                                                     Should
                                                     monitor the
                                                     performance
                                                     of the
                                                     Developer
                                                     and the Units
                                                     in SEZ
* Should Discharge such other functions
assigned to him by the C.G. or delegated by the
board.




Development commissioner
According to sec 12 Development Commissioner
to be overall in charge of the SEZ and can
exercise administrative control and supervision
over the officers and employees. Further the
development commissioner may call for
information form a Developer or Unit as maybe
necessary to monitor the performance of the
developer and the Unit.

Approval Committee (Section 13)
To exercise the specified power and functions,
the C.G. may constitute by notification, a
committee for every SEZ, to be known as
Approval Committee. For existing SEZ, the
approval Committee has to be constituted within
6 months from the date of commencement of the
Act and in case of other SEZs established after
the commencement of the Act the committee
should be constituted within 6 months from the
date of establishment of such SEZ.
According to Section 13 all orders decisions and
instructions of the Approval Committee should
be authenticated by the signature of the chair
person or any other authorised member.


Power and functions of Approval Committee
(Section 14)
Every Approval Committee should discharge the
functions and powers in respect of the following
matters:
a) Approve the import or procurement of goods
from the Domestic Tariff Area, for carrying on the
authorised operations by a Developer in the
Special Economic Zone.
b) Approve providing of services by a service
provider from outside India or from the Domestic
Tariff Area for carrying on the authorised
operations by the Developer, in the SEZ.
c) Monitor the utilisation of goods or services or
warehousing or trading in the SEZ.
d) Allow on receipt of approval foreign
collaborations and foreign direct investments,
including investments by a person outside India
for setting up a Unit.
e) Monitor or supervise compliance of conditions
subject to which the letter of approval or
permission, if any, is granted to the developer or
entrepreneur
f) Perform any other functions as may be
entrusted to it by the C.G. or the S.G. concerned,
as the case may be.

Setting up of Unit (Section 15)
Any person, who intends to set up a Unit for
carrying on the authorised operations in SEZ,
should submit a proposal to the concerned
Development Commissioner. The development
commissioner then forwards the proposal to
Approval Committee for its approval. The
Approval Committee can, approve the proposal
with or with out modification, and subject to such
term and conditions as it may deem fit, or reject
the same. Before modification or rejection of
proposal, the Approval Committee should give
an opportunity of being heard to the concerned
person.
Person aggrieved by an order of Approval
Committee may make an appeal to the Board of
Approvals within the prescribed time and
specified manner.

Cancellation of letter of approval granted to
entrepreneur (Section 16)
The approval committee may cancel the letter of
Approval of an entrepreneur after giving
reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Approval committee can cancel the letter of
approval at any time, if it has any reason to
believe that the entrepreneur has contravened
any of the term and conditions or its obligation
subject to which the letter of Approval was
granted to the entrepreneur. Provided further
that from the date of cancellation the Unit shall
not be entitled to any exemption, concession,
benefit or deduction available to it as such. Any
person aggrieved from an order of Approval
Committee can make an appeal to the Board of
Approval within the prescribed time.

Setting up and Operation of Offshore Banking
Unit (Section 17)
An application for setting up and operation of an
Offshore Banking Unit in SEZ can be made to
Reserve Bank in the prescribed form and
manner. The RBI after being satisfied may grant
permission to such applicant for setting up and
operation of an Offshore Banking Unit in SEZ.
According to section 17(3) RBI may specify, by
notification, the term and conditions subject to
which an Offshore banking unit may be set up
and operate in the SEZ.


Single Application form, return etc (Section 19)
C.G. may prescribe single application form for
obtaining any licence, permission or registration
or approval by a Developer or an entrepreneur
under one or more Central Acts. According to
section 19(b), C.G. may authorize the board, the
Development Commissioner and the approval
Committee to exercise its power on matters
relating to the development of SEZ or setting up
or operation or units.
Section 19(c) allows the C.G. to prescribe single
form for furnishing returns or information by a
developer or an entrepreneur under one or more
Central Acts

Note: - Any person aggrieved by the order of the
designated Court may file an appeal to High
Court within 60 days from the date of
Communication of the order of the said court to
him. Further period may also be provided if high
court has a reason to believe that the applicant
was prevented by sufficient cause from filling an
appeal within the prescribed period

Agency to Inspect
Section 20 empowers the Central Government to
specify, by notification, any officer or agency for
carrying out surveys or inspections for securing
the compliance with the provisions of any
Central Act by a Developer or an entrepreneur,
Section 21 empowers the Central Government to
authorise any officer or agency to be the
enforcement officer or agency in respect of any
notified offence committed in a Special Economic
Zone. Every officer or agency so authorised has
been granted all the corresponding powers of
investigation, inspection, search or seizure as
provided under the relevant Central Act in
respect of the notified offences
Section 22 empowers the agency or officer, with
prior intimation to the Development
Commissioner concerned to carry out the
investigation, inspection, search or seizure in the
Special Economic Zone or in a Unit if such
agency or officer has reason to believe (reasons
to be recorded in writing) that a notified offence
has been committed or is likely to be committed
in the
Special Economic Zone.

Application of Income tax
Section 27 provides for application of the
provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961 to the
Developer and entrepreneur for carrying on the
authorised operations in the Special Economic
Zones or Unit subject to modifications specified
in the second schedule
Duration of goods and Services in SEZ
Section 28 empowers the Central Government to
specify, the period during which any goods
brought into, or services provided in, any Unit or
Special Economic Zone without payment of
taxes, duties, levies or cess, shall remain or
continue to be provided in such Unit or Special
Economic Zone
Section 30 provides that any goods removed
from a Special Economic Zone to the Domestic
Tariff Area be chargeable to duties of customs
including anti-dumping, countervailing and
safeguard duties under the Customs Tariff Act,
1975,

SEZ Authority
Section 31 dealing with the Constitution of
Authority empowers the Central Government to
constitute by notification in the Official Gazette,
an Authority for every SEZ to exercise powers
conferred on and discharge the functions
assigned to it
Section 34 casts upon the Authority a duty to
undertake such measures as it thinks fit for the
development, operation and management of the
respective Special Economic Zone. Section
34(2) provides for following measures : the
development of infrastructure in the Special
Economic Zone; promoting exports from the
Special Economic Zone; reviewing the
functioning and performance of the Special
Economic Zone; levy user or service charges or
fees or rent for the use of properties belonging to
the Authority;
? performing such other functions as may be
prescribed.?
Section 39 casts upon every Authority of the
Special Economic Zone a duty to furnish to the
Central
Government such returns and statements and
such particulars in regard to the promotion and
development of exports and the operation and
maintenance of the Special Economic Zone and
Units as it may require from time to time.

Identity card
Section 46 requires that every person whether
employed or residing or required to be present in
a Special Economic Zone be provided an identity
card by every Development
Commissioner in prescribed form and containing
specified particulars
Section 51 giving overriding effect to this Act
provides that the provisions of this Act shall have
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or in any instrument having effect
by virtue of any law other than this Act.

Special Economic Zones to be ports, airports
inland container depots, land stations etc. in
certain cases
Section 53 provides that a Special Economic
Zone, on and from the appointed day, be
deemed to be a territory outside the customs
territory of India for the purposes of undertaking
the authorised operations.




Lesson 7: Law relating to Foreign Contribution
Regulation


INTRODUCTION
The foreign contribution (Regulation) Act 1976
was enacted to regulate the acceptance and
utilization of foreign contribution or hospitality
with a view to ensure that parliamentary
institutions, political associations, academic and
other voluntary organisations as well as
individuals working in important areas of national
life may function in a manner consistent with the
values of sovereign democratic republic. The act
was amended in 1984.

However, in 2010, Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) act 2010 was enacted and 1976
was repealed w.e.f May 1, 2011. The MHA has
issued necessary gazette notification dated 29th
April 2011 in this regard. The MHA also notified
the foreign contribution (Regulation) Rules 2011
which came into force simultaneously with FCRA
2010.


DEFINITIONS
Foreign "Foreign contribution" means the
donation, delivery or transfer Contribution made
by any foreign source,-
i. Of any article, not being an article given to a
person as a gift for his personal use, if the
market value, in India, of such article, on the
date of such gift, is not more than such sum as
may be specified from time to time, by the Govt.
by the rules made by it in this behalf;
ii. of any currency, whether Indian or foreign;
iii. of any security as defined in sec 2 (h) of the
Securities
Contracts(Regulation) Act 1956
Foreign means any offer, not being a purely
casual one, made in cash or Hospitality kind by a
foreign source for providing a person with the
costs of travel
[Section 2 (1) (i)] to any foreign country or
territory or with free boarding, lodging, transport
or medical treatment.
PROHIBITION TO ACCEPT FOREIGN
CONTRIBUTION
Section 3(1) prohibits following person to accept
foreign contribution:
(a) candidate for election;
(b) correspondent, columnist, cartoonist, editor,
owner, printer or publisher of a registered
newspaper;
(c) public servant, Judge, Government servant or
employee of any corporation or any other body
controlled or owned by the Government; (d)
member of any Legislature;
(e) political party or office-bearer thereof;
(f) organisation of a political nature as may be
specified under section 5(1) by the Central
Government;
(g) association or company engaged in the
production or broadcast of audio news or audio
visual news or current affairs programmes
through any electronic mode, or any other
electronic form as defined in section 2(1)(r) of
the Information Technology Act, 2000 or any
other mode of mass communication;
(h) correspondent or columnist, cartoonist,
editor, owner of the association or company
referred to in clause (g).

Section 3(2) states that:
(a) No person, resident in India, and no citizen of
India resident outside India, shall accept any
foreign contribution, or acquire or agree to
acquire any currency from a foreign source, on
behalf of any political party, or any person
referred to in sub-section (1), or both.
(b) No person, resident in India, shall deliver any
currency, whether Indian or foreign, which has
been accepted from any foreign source, to any
person if he knows or has reasonable cause to
believe that such other person intends, or is
likely, to deliver such currency to any political
party or any person referred to in sub-section (1),
or both.
(c) No citizen of India resident outside India shall
deliver any currency, whether Indian or foreign,
which has been accepted from any foreign
source, to -
(i) any political party or any person referred to in
sub-section (1), or both; or
(ii) any other person, if he knows or has
reasonable cause to believe that such other
person intends, or is likely, to deliver such
currency to a political party or to any person
referred to in sub-section (1), or both.



According to Section 3(3) of the Act, no person
receiving any currency, whether Indian or
foreign, from a foreign source on behalf of any
person or class of persons, referred to in section
9, shall deliver such currency -
(a) to any person other than a person for which it
was received; or
(b) to any other person, if he knows or has
reasonable cause to believe that such other
person intends, or is likely, to deliver such
currency to a person other than the person for
which such currency was received.

Persons to Whom Section 3 Shall Not Apply
According to Section 4 of the Act, nothing
contained in section 3 shall apply to the
acceptance, by any person specified in that
section, of any foreign contribution where such
contribution is accepted by him, subject to the
provisions of section 10, -
(a) by way of salary, wages or other
remuneration due to him or to any group of
persons working under him, from any foreign
source or by way of payment in the ordinary
course of business transacted in India by such
foreign source; or
(b) by way of payment, in the course of
international trade or commerce, or in the
ordinary course of business transacted by him
outside India; or
(c) as an agent of a foreign source in relation to
any transaction made by such foreign source
with the Central Government or State
Government; or
(d) by way of a gift or presentation made to him
as a member of any Indian delegation, provided
that such gift or present was accepted in
accordance with the rules made by the Central
Government with regard to the acceptance or
retention of such gift or presentation; or (e) from
his relative; or
(f) by way of remittance received, in the ordinary
course of business through any official channel,
post office, or any authorised person in foreign
exchange under the Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999; or
(g) by way of any scholarship, stipend or any
payment of like nature

Procedure to notify an organization of a political
nature
Section 5(1) provides that the CG may, having
regard to the activities of the organisation or the
ideology propagated by the organisation or the
programme of the organisation or the
association of the organisations with the
activities of any political party, by an order
published in the Official Gazette, specify such
organisation as an organisation of a political
nature not being a political party, referred to in
section 3(1)(f). Further, the CG may, frame the
guidelines specifying the ground or grounds on
which an organisation shall be specified as an
organisation of a political nature
Restriction on acceptance of foreign hospitality
Section 6 prohibits acceptance of foreign
hospitality by certain persons except with the
prior permission of CG.
 No member of a Legislature or office-bearer of
a political party or Judge or Government servant
or employee of any corporation or any other
body owned or controlled by the Government
shall, while visiting any country or territory
outside India, accept, except with the prior
permission of CG, any foreign hospitality.
 However, it shall not be necessary to obtain
any such permission for an emergent medical
aid needed on account of sudden illness
contracted during a visit outside India
 But, where such foreign hospitality has been
received, the person receiving such hospitality
shall give, within one month from the date of
receipt of such hospitality an intimation to the
CG as to the receipt of such hospitality, and the
source from which, and the manner in which,
such hospitality was received by him.

Prohibition to transfer foreign contribution to
other person
 Section 7 prohibits the transfer of foreign
contribution to other person.
 Accordingly, no person who is registered and
granted a certificate or has obtained prior
permission under the Act; and receives any
foreign contribution, shall transfer such foreign
contribution to any other person unless such
other person is also registered and had been
granted the certificate or obtained the prior
permission under the Act.
 However, such person may transfer, with the
prior approval of the CG, a part of such foreign
contribution to any other person who has not
been granted a certificate or obtained permission
under the Act in accordance with the rules made
by the CG.

Utilization of foreign contribution
According to Section 8 of the Act, every person,
who is registered and granted a certificate or
given prior permission under the Act and
receives any foreign contribution, -
(a) shall utilise such contribution for the
purposes for which the contribution has been
received:
Provided that any foreign contribution or any
income arising out of it shall not be used for
speculative business:
Provided further that the Central Government
shall, by rules, specify the activities or business
which shall be construed as speculative
business for the purpose of this section; (b) shall
not defray as far as possible such sum, not
exceeding twenty percent of such contribution,
received in a financial year, to meet
administrative expenses:
Provided that administrative expenses exceeding
twenty percent of such contribution may be
defrayed with prior approval of the Central
Government.
Power of Central Government to prohibit receipt
of foreign contribution
Section 9 deals with power of CG to prohibit
receipt of foreign contribution, etc., in certain
cases.

Power to prohibit payment of currency received
in contravention of the Act
Section 10 provides that where the CG is
satisfied, after making such inquiry as it may
deem fit, that any person has in his custody or
control any article or currency or security,
whether Indian or foreign, which has been
accepted by such person in contravention of any
of the provisions of this Act, it may, by order in
writing, prohibit such person from paying,
delivering, transferring or otherwise dealing with,
in any manner whatsoever.

Registration of certain persons with Central
Government
 Section 11(1) requires that person having a
definite cultural, economic, educational, religious
or social programme shall accept foreign
contribution if such person obtains a certificate of
registration from the CG.
 Certificate granted shall be valid for a period of
5 years and the prior permission shall be valid
for the specific purpose or specific amount of
foreign contribution proposed to be received, as
the case may be.

Grant of certificate of registration
Section 12(1) provides that an application by a
person for grant of certificate or giving prior
permission, shall be made to the CG.

Section 12(4) provides following conditions for
granting certificate of registration.
a) The person making an application for
registration or grant of prior permission-
i. is not fictitious or benami;
ii. has not been prosecuted or convicted for
indulging in activities aimed at conversion
through inducement or force, either directly or
indirectly, from one religious faith to another;
iii. has not been prosecuted or convicted for
creating communal tension or disharmony in any
specified district or any other part of the country;
iv. has not been found guilty or diversion or mis-
utilisation of its funds;
v. is not engaged or likely to engage in
propagation of sedition or advocate violent
methods to achieve its ends;
vi. is not likely to use the foreign contribution for
personal gains or divert it for undesirable
purposes;
vii. has not contravened any of the provisions of
this Act; viii. has not been prohibited from
accepting foreign contribution;
b) the person making an application for
registration, has undertaken reasonable activity
in its chosen filed for the benefit of the society for
which the foreign contribution is proposed to be
utilised;
c) the person making an application for giving
prior permission, has prepared a reasonable
project for the benefit of the society for which the
foreign contribution is proposed to be utilised;
d) in case the person being an individual, such
individual has neither been convicted under any
law for the time being in force nor any
prosecution for any offence pending against him;
e) in case the person being other than an
individual, any of its directors or office bearers
has neither been convicted under any law for the
time being in force nor any prosecution for any
offence is pending against him;
f) the acceptance of foreign contribution by the
person, is not likely to affect prejudicially
-
* the sovereignty and integrity of India; or
* the security, strategic, scientific or economic
interest of the State; or
* the public interest; or
* freedom or fairness of election to any
Legislature; or
* friendly relation with any foreign State; or
* harmony between religious, racial, social,
linguistic, regional groups, castes or
communities;

Suspension of certificate
Section 13 (1) provides that where the CG, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, is satisfied that
pending consideration of the question of
cancelling the, it is necessary so to do, it may,
by order in writing, suspend the certificate for
such period not exceeding 180 days may be
specified in the order. Further every person
whose certificate has been suspended shall not
receive any foreign contribution during the period
of suspension of certificate.
Cancellation of certificate
Section 14 empowers the CG to cancel the
certificate. Accordingly, the CG may, if it is
satisfied after making such inquiry as it may
deem fit, by an order, cancel the certificate if -
a) The holder of the certificate has made a
statement in, or in relation to, the application for
the grant of registration or renewal thereof, which
is incorrect or false;or
b) The holder of the certificate has violated any
of the terms and conditions of the certificate or
renewal thereof; or
c) In the opinion of the CG, it is necessary in the
public interest to cancel the certificate; or
d) The holder of certificate has violated any of
the provisions of this Act or rules or order made
thereunder; or
e) If the holder of the certificate has not been
engaged in any reasonable activity in its chosen
field for the benefit of the society for 2
consecutive years or has become defunct.

Management of Foreign contribution of person
whose certificate has been cancelled
Section 15 provides that the foreign contribution
and assets created out of the foreign contribution
in the custody of every person whose certificate
has been cancelled under section
14 shall vest in such authority as may be
prescribed.

Renewal of certificate [Section 16].
Every person who has been granted a certificate,
shall have such certificate renewed within six
months before the expiry of the period of the
certificate

Foreign contribution through scheduled bank
Section 17 provides that every person who has
been granted a certificate or given prior
permission shall receive foreign contribution in a
single account only through such one of the
branches of a bank as he may specify in his
application for grant of certificate.
Section 17 (2) states that the specified branch of
the State Bank of India at New Delhi or the
branch of the scheduled bank where the person
referred to in sub-section (1) has opened his
foreign contribution account or the authorised
person in foreign exchange, shall report to such
authority as may be specified, -
(a) the prescribed amount of foreign remittance;
(b) the source and manner in which the foreign
remittance was received; and
(c) other particulars;
(d) in such form and manner as may be
prescribed

Intimation
Section 18 requires every person who has been
granted a certificate or given prior approval to
provide within such time and in such manner as
may be prescribed, an intimation to the Central
Government, and such other authority as may be
specified by the Central Government, as to the
amount of each foreign contribution received by
it, the source from which and the manner in
which such foreign contribution was received,
and the purposes for which, and the manner in
which such foreign contribution was utilised by
him.

Maintenance of accounts
Section 19 requires every person who has been
granted a certificate or given prior approval to
maintain, in such form and manner as may be
prescribed, an account of any foreign
contribution received by him; and a record as to
the manner in which the contribution was
received.

Intimation by candidate for election
Section 21 requires every candidate for election,
who had received any foreign contribution, at
any time within one hundred and eighty days
immediately preceding the date on which he is
duly nominated as such candidate, shall give,
within such time and in such manner as may be
prescribed

Section 22 provides that where any person who
was permitted to accept foreign contribution
under this Act, ceases to exist or has become
defunct, all the assets of such person shall be
disposed of in accordance with the provisions
contained in any law for the time being in force
under which the person was registered or
incorporated or as the CG may deem fit.


OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
Making of False Statement, Declaration or
Delivering False Accounts

As per Section 33 of the Act, any person, subject
to this Act, who knowingly, -
(i) gives false intimation under clause (c) of
section 9 or section 18; or
(ii) seeks prior permission or registration by
means of fraud, false representation or
concealment of material fact, shall, on conviction
by a court, be liable to imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months or with fine or
with both.

Punishment for contravention of any provision of
the Act
Section 35 states that whoever accepts, or
assists any person, political party or organisation
in accepting, any foreign contribution or any
currency or security from a foreign source, in
contravention of any provision of this Act or any
rule or order made thereunder, shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to five years, or with fine, or with both.

Punishment for contravention of any provision of
the Act
As per Section 37 of the Act, whoever fails to
comply with any provision of this Act for which no
separate penalty has been provided in this Act
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year, or with fine or
with both

Offences by Companies
Section 39 provides that where an offence under
this Act or any rule or order made thereunder
has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the offence was
committed, was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct of
the business of the company, as well as the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-
section shall render such person liable to any
punishment if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he had
exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
Notwithstanding anything contained above ,
where an offence under this Act or any rule or
order made thereunder has been committed by a
company and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance
of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer
of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly

LESSON 8: PREVENTION OF MONEY
LAUNDERING ACT


Introduction

* The purpose and object of the Act is prevention
of money laundering, which simply means
conversion of tainted (black) money into
untainted(white) money.
* Money laundering is the processing of criminal
proceeds to disguise its illegal origin.
* Terrorism, illegal arms sales, financial crimes,
smuggling and the activities of organized crime,
including drug trafficking and prostitution rings,
generate huge sums. Embezzlement insider
trading, bribery and computer fraud also produce
large profits and create an incentive to legitimize
the ill-gotten gains through money laundering.

Process of Money Laundering
Money is Laundered in following three stages :
Placement:
Here, the launderer introduces his illegal profits
into the financial system by breaking up large
sums of money into smaller sums.
Layering:
Here, the launderer engages in a series of
conversions or movements of funds to distance
them from their source.
Integration:
Here, the Launderer integrates the smaller
amounts into larger sums and enters the
legitimate economy by investing into real estate,
business ventures, film industry etc.

What influence does money laundering have on
economic development?
Launderers are continuously looking for new
routes for laundering their funds.
Economies with growing or developing financial
centres, but inadequate controls are particularly
vulnerable as established financial centre
countries implement comprehensive anti-money
laundering regimes. Differences between
national anti-money laundering systems will be
exploited by launderers, who tend to move their
networks to countries and financial systems with
weak or ineffective countermeasures. But
postponing action is dangerous. The more it is
deferred, the more organised crime will increase.
As with the damaged integrity of an individual
financial institution, there is a damping effect on
foreign direct. Fighting money laundering and
terrorist financing is therefore a part of creating a
business friendly environment which is a
precondition for lasting economic development.
Impact of Money Laundering
Money laundering process may create the
following impact on the society

* Widespread use of bribery in government
offices leading to corruption.
* Control over vast sector of economy by handful
of people through investment by unfair means
* Infiltration of banking and financial institutions
through organized crimes.
* Dampen social fabric and ethical standards
prevalent in the society.
* Weakens the democratic institution

Global initiatives in the prevention of money
laundering
1. Fiancial Action Task Force (FATF)
FATF was established in 1989. It is an
international body which promotes measures
taken up to counteract the world wide impact of
money laundering Main tasks/functions of FATF
are:
* Review the techniques adopted for money
laundering
* Checks the initiatives made by the countries to
counteract money laundering ? Spread
awareness among non-member countries also
Thus, FATF study, examine and evaluate the
current situation, defines the policy and initiatives
measures that can act as solution to the problem
of money laundering.

2. Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002
To counteract the harms caused by money
laundering and with a view to prevent the same,
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 was
enacted. This Act provides for offences,
punishments in lieu of money laundering,
confiscation attachment and other adjudication
provisions so as to ensure effective prevention of
money laundering.

3. The Vienna Convention
The first major initiative in the prevention of
money laundering was the United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances in
December 1988 (popularly known as Vienna
Convention). This convention laid the
groundwork for efforts to combat money
laundering by obliging the member states to
criminalize the laundering of money from drug
trafficking.
It promotes international cooperation in
investigations and makes extradition between
member states applicable to money laundering.
The convention also establishes the principle
that domestic bank secrecy provisions should
not interfere with international criminal
investigations.

4. Council of Europe Convention
The Council of Europe Convention on
Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation of
Proceeds of Crime, 1990 establishes a common
policy on money laundering. The Convention
lays down the principles for international
cooperation among the member states, which
may also include states outside the Council of
Europe. This convention came into force in
September 1993. One of the purposes of the
convention is to facilitate :
* International cooperation as regards
investigative assistance,
* Search, seizure and confiscation of the
proceeds of all types of criminality,
* Particularly serious crimes, such as, drug
offences, arms dealing, terrorist offences etc.
and other offences which generate large profits.


5. European Union Money Laundering Directive
In response to the new opportunities for money
laundering opened up by the liberalization of
capital movements and cross-border financial
services in the European Union, the Council of
the European Communities in June, 1991 issued
a directive on the Prevention of Use of the
Financial System for the Purpose of Money
Laundering. The directive requires member
states to outlaw money laundering. The member
states have been put under obligation to require
financial institutions to establish and maintain
internal systems to prevent laundering, to obtain
the identification of customers with whom they
enter into transaction of more than a particular
amount and to keep proper records for at least
five years. The financial institutions are also
required to report suspicious transactions and
ensure that such reporting does not result in
liability for the institution or its employees.

6. Basle Committee's Statement of Principles
In December 1988 the Basle Committee on
Banking Regulation Supervisory Practices
issued a statement of principles to be complied
by the international banks of member states.
These principles include identifying customers,
avoiding suspicious transactions, and
cooperating with law enforcement agencies.
The statement aims at encouraging the banking
sector to adopt common position in order to
ensure that banks are not used to hide or
launder funds acquired through criminal
activities.




Definitions




                                                      As per
                                                      Section 2(1)
                                                      (wa)
                                                      "Reporting
                                                      entity" means
Reporting entity                                      a banking
company, financial institution, intermediary or a
person carrying on a designated business or
profession.
Special Court Section 2(1) (z) defines Special
Court to means a Court of Session designated
as Special Court under subsection (1) of section
43.

Definition and Meaning of Money Laundering
Section 3 of the Act states that whosoever
directly or indirectly attempts to indulge or
knowingly assists or knowingly is a party or
actually involved in any process or activity
connected with the proceeds of crime including
its concealment, possession, acquisition or use
and projecting or claiming it is an untainted
property shall be guilty of offence of money
laundering.

Section 4 provides that any person who commits
the offence of money laundering shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than three years but
which may extend to seven years and also liable
to fine.
However, where the proceeds of crime involved
in money laundering relates to any offence
specified under the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, the punishment
may extend to rigorous imprisonment for ten
year.


Attachment of property involved in money
laundering (Section 5)
Where the Director or any officer not below the
rank of Deputy Director authorized by him, has
reason to believe on the basis of material in his
possession that any person is in possession of
any proceeds of money laundering, such person
has been charged of having committed a
scheduled offence and such proceeds of crime
are likely to be concealed, transferred or dealt
with in any manner which may result in
frustrating any proceedings relating to
confiscation of such proceeds of crime, such
officer may by order in writing, provisionally
attach such property for a period not exceeding
180 days from the date of the order, in the
manner provided in the Second Schedule of the
Income Tax Act,1961.
The Director or any other officer who
provisionally attaches any property shall, within a
period of 30 days from such attachment file a
complaint, stating the facts of such attachment
before the Adjudicating Authority.

Adjudicating Authority
Section 6 empowers the Central Government to
appoint, by notification, one or more persons not
below the prescribed rank or designation or
having prescribed experience, as the
Adjudicating
Authority to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and
authority conferred on or under the Act.

Adjudication (Section 8)
Section 8(1) states that on receipt of a complaint
under section 5(5), or applications made under
section 17(4) or under section 18(10), if the
Adjudicating Authority has reason to believe that
any person has committed an offence under
section 3 or is in possession of proceeds of
crime, it may serve a notice of not less than thirty
days on such person calling upon him to indicate
the sources of his income, earning or assets, out
of which or by means of which he has acquired
the property attached under sub-section (1) of
section 5, or, seized 2 or frozen under section 17
or section 18, the evidence on which he relies
and other relevant information and particulars,
and to show cause why all or any of such
properties should not be declared to be the
properties involved in money-laundering and
confiscated by the Central Government.
Provided that where a notice under this sub-
section specifies any property as being held by a
person on behalf of any other person, a copy of
such notice shall also be served upon such other
person. Provided further that where such
property is held jointly by more than one person,
such notice shall be served to all persons
holding such property.

Section 8(4) states that where the provisional
order of attachment made under sub-section (1)
of section 5 has been confirmed under sub-
section (3), the Director or any other officer
authorised by him in this behalf shall forthwith
take the possession of the property attached
under section 5 or frozen under sub-section (1A)
of section 17, in such manner as may be
prescribed. Provided that if it is not practicable to
take possession of a property frozen under sub-
section (1A) of section 17, the order of
confiscation shall have the same effect as if the
property had been taken possession of.




Vesting of Property in Central Government
(Section 9)
Section 9 provides that an order of confiscation
made, in respect of any property of a person,
vests in the Central Government all the rights
and title in such property free from all
encumbrances.
The Adjudicating Authority after giving an
opportunity of being heard to any other person
interested in the property attached or seized is of
the opinion that any encumbrances on the
property or lease hold interest has been created
with a view to defeat the provisions of the Act, it
may, by order declare such encumbrance or
lease hold interest to be void and thereupon the
property shall vest in the Central Government
free from such encumbrances or lease hold.
However, this provision shall not discharge any
person from any liability in respect of such
encumbrances which may be enforced against
such person for a suit of damages.

Obligation of Banking Companies, Financial
Institutions and
Intermediaries
Section 12 requires every banking company,
financial institution and intermediary to maintain
a record of all transactions, the nature and value
of which may be prescribed, whether such
transactions comprise of a single transaction or a
series of transactions legally connected to each
other, and when such series of transactions take
place within a month. These informations are
required to be furnished to the Director within
such time as may be prescribed.
Banks and financial institutions are required to
verify and maintain the records of the identity of
all its clients, in such manner as may be
prescribed. The records as mentioned above are
required to be maintained for a period of 10
years from the date of cessation of the
transactions between the clients and the
Banking company, financial institution or
intermediary.

Section 13 states that the Director may either on
his own motion or on an application made by any
authority, officer, or person, call for records of all
transactions and make such inquiry or cause
such inquiry to be made, as he thinks fit. In the
course of any inquiry, if the Director finds that a
banking company, financial institution or an
intermediary or any of its officers has failed to
maintain or retain records in accordance with the
provisions of the Act, he may, by order, levy a
fine on such banking company, financial
institution or intermediary which shall not be less
than
Rs.10, 000 but may extend to Rs.1,00, 000 for
each failure

Section 15 empowers the Central Government to
prescribe, in consultation with the Reserve Bank
Of India, the procedure and the manner of
maintaining and furnishing information for the
purpose of implementation or the provisions of
the Act.

Summon, Searches and Seizures etc.

Section 16 empowers an authority to enter, on
having reason to believe that an offence u/s 3
has been committed, any lace within the limits of
the area assigned to him or in respect of which
he is authorized.
Section 16(3) requires such authority to place
marks of identification on the records inspected
by him and make or cause to be made extracts
or copies therefrom, make an inventory of any
property checked or verified by him and record
the statement of any person present in the place
which may be useful for, or relevant to, any
proceedings under the Act

Section 18 of the Act deals with search of
persons and provides that if an authority
authorized in this behalf by the Central
Government by general or special order has
reason to believe that any person has secreted
about his person or in anything under his
possession, ownership or control any record or
proceeds of crime which may be useful for or
relevant to any proceedings under this Act, he
may search that person and seize such record or
property which may be useful for or relevant to
any proceedings under this Act.


Retention of Property
1. Where any property has been seized under
section 17 or section 18 or frozen under sub-
section (1A) of section 17 and the officer
authorised by the Director in this behalf has, on
the basis of material in his possession, reason to
believe (the reason for such belief to be
recorded by him in writing) that such property is
required to be retained for the purposes of
adjudication under section 8, such property may,
if seized, be retained or if frozen, may continue
to remain frozen, for a period not exceeding one
hundred and eighty days from the day on which
such property was seized or frozen, as the case
may be.

2. The officer authorised by the Director shall,
immediately after he has passed an order for
retention or continuation of freezing of the
property for purposes of adjudication under
section 8, forward a copy of the order along with
the material in his possession, referred to in sub-
section (1), to the Adjudicating Authority, in a
sealed envelope, in the manner as may be
prescribed and such Adjudicating Authority shall
keep such order and material for such period as
may be prescribed.

3. On the expiry of the period specified in sub-
section (1), the property shall be returned to the
person from whom such property was seized or
whose property was ordered to be frozen unless
the Adjudicating Authority permits retention or
continuation of freezing of such property beyond
the said period.

4. The Adjudicating Authority, before authorising
the retention or continuation of freezing of such
property beyond the period specified in sub-
section (1), shall satisfy himself that the property
is prima facie involved in money-laundering and
the property is required for the purposes of
adjudication under section 8.

5. After passing the order of confiscation under
sub-section (5) or sub-section (7) of section 8,
the Special Court shall direct the release of all
property other than the property involved in
moneylaundering to the person from whom such
property was seized or the persons entitled to
receive it.

6. Where an order releasing the property has
been made by the Special Court under sub-
section (6) of section 8 or by the Adjudicating
Authority under section 58B or sub-section (2A)
of section 60, the Director or any officer
authorised by him in this behalf may withhold the
release of any such property for a period of
ninety days from the date of such order, if he is
of the opinion that such property is relevant for
the appeal proceedings under the Act

Presumption in Inter-connected Transactions
Section 23 of the Act deals with presumption in
inter-connected transactions and provides that
where money laundering involves two or more
transactions and one or more such transactions
is or are proved to be involved in money
laundering, then for the purposes of adjudication
or confiscation u/s 8, it shall be presumed that
the remaining transactions form part of such
interconnected transactions unless otherwise
proved to the satisfaction of the adjudicating
Authority.




Appellate Tribunal
Section 25 empowers the Central Government,
to establish an Appellate Tribunal to hear
appeals against the orders of Adjudicating
Authority and other authorities under the Act.
The Appellate Tribunal constituted under sub-
section (1) of section 12 of the Smugglers and
Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of
Property) Act, 1976 shall be the Appellate
Tribunal for hearing appeals against the orders
of the Adjudicating Authority and the other
authorities under this Act.
Further appeal from the orders of the Appellate
Tribunal would lie to the High Court under
Section
* The origin of this Directorate goes back to 1st
May, 1956, when an 'Enforcement Unit' was
formed in the Department of Economic Affairs
for handling Exchange Control Laws violations
under Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (FERA),
1947.
* It was headquartered in Delhi, headed by a
Legal Service Officer as the Director of
Enforcement.
* It had two branches - at Bombay and Calcutta.
* In the year 1957, this Unit was renamed as
'Enforcement Directorate', and another branch
was opened at Madras (now Chennai).
* In 1960, the administrative control of the
Directorate was transferred from the Department
of Economic Affairs to the Department of
Revenue.
* With the passage of time, FERA 1947 was
repealed and replaced by FERA, 1973.
* With the onset of the process of economic
liberalisation, FERA, 1973, which was a
regulatory law, was repealed and in its place, a
new law viz. the Foreign Exchange Management
Act, 1999 (FEMA) came into operation w.e.f. 1st
June 2000.
* Further, in tune with the International Anti
Money Laundering regime, the Prevention of
Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA) was
enacted and ED was entrusted with its
enforcement w.e.f. 1st July 2005.


Structure of ED?
* Hierarchy: The Directorate of Enforcement,
with its headquarters at New Delhi, is headed by
the Director of Enforcement.
o There                                          are five        regional   offices   at   Mumbai,   Chennai,   Chandigarh,
Kolkata and Delhi headed by Special Directors of
Enforcement.
o The Directorate has 10 Zonal offices each of
which is headed by a Deputy Director and 11
sub Zonal Offices each of which is headed by an
Assistant Director.
                                                 It comprises
                                                 officers of IRS
                                                 (Indian
                                                 Revenue
                                                 Services),
                                                 IPS (Indian
                                                 Police
                                                 Services) and
                                                 IAS (Indian
                                                 Administrative
                                                 Services)
* Recruitment: Recruitment of the officers is    such as
done directly and by drawing officers from other Income Tax
investigation agencies. o                        officer,
Excise officer, Customs officer, and police

How ED Functions under PMLA?
* The ED carries out search (property) and
seizure (money/documents) after it has decided
that the money has been laundered, under
Section 16 (power of survey) and Section 17
(search and seizure) of the PMLA. o On the
basis of that, the authorities decide if arrest is
needed as per Section 19 (power of arrest).
* Under Section 50 of the PMLA, the ED can
also directly carry out search and seizure without
calling the person for questioning.
o It is not necessary to summon the person first
and then start with the search and seizure.
* If the person is arrested, the ED gets 60 days
to file the prosecution complaint (chargesheet)
as the punishment under PMLA doesn't go
beyond seven years.
o If no one is arrested and only the property is
attached, then the prosecution complaint along
with attachment order is to be submitted before
the adjudicating authority within 60 days.

RBI Master Direction - Know Your Customer
(KYC) Direction
The objective of Know Your Customer (KYC)
Norms/Anti-Money Laundering (AML)
Measures/Combating of Financing of Terrorism
(CFT) guidelines is to prevent banks from being
used, intentionally or unintentionally, by criminal
elements for money laundering or terrorist
financing activities.
KYC procedures also enable banks to
know/understand their customers and their
financial dealings better which in turn help them
manage their risks prudently.
Regulated Entities (REs) are required to follow
certain customer identification procedures while
undertaking a transaction either by establishing
an account-based relationship or otherwise and
monitor their transactions.

Regulated Entities (REs) means:
a. all Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs)/
Regional Rural Banks (RRBs)/ Local Area Banks
(LABs)/ All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
(UCBs) /State and Central Co-operative Banks
(StCBs / CCBs) and any other entity which has
been licenced under Section 22 of Banking
Regulation Act, 1949, which as a group shall be
referred as 'banks'. b. All India Financial
Institutions (AIFIs).
c. All Non-Banking Finance Companies
(NBFCs), Miscellaneous Non-Banking
Companies (MNBCs) and Residuary Non-
Banking Companies (RNBCs).
d. All Payment System Providers (PSPs)/
System Participants (SPs) and Prepaid Payment
Instrument Issuers (PPI Issuers).
e. All authorised persons (APs) including those
who are agents of Money Transfer Service
Scheme (MTSS), regulated by the Regulator.







LESSON 9: LAW RELATING TO FUGITIVE
ECONOMIC OFFENDERS


Introduction

Fugitive Economic Offenders Act, 2018 provides
for measures to deter fugitive economic
offenders from evading the process of law in
India by staying outside the jurisdiction of Indian
courts, to preserve the sanctity of the rule of law
in India

Salient Features of the Act




Any individual against whom a warrant for arrest
in relation to a Scheduled Offence has been
issued by any Court in India, who -
(i) has left India so as to avoid criminal
prosecution; or
(ii) being abroad, refuses to return to India to
face criminal prosecution is a fugitive economic
offender

Economic Offence
Economic offences relate to counterfeiting,
fraud, money laundering, tax evasion and others.
The other laws in the country which handled
such offences include:
1. Prevention of Money-Laundering Act -
prohibits money laundering.
2. Benami Properties Transactions Act, 1988 -
bans benami transactions.
3. Companies Act, 2013 - punishes fraud and
unlawful acceptance of deposits.
4. Indian Penal Code, 1860 - covers various
crimes such as cheating, forgery, counterfeiting,
etc.
5. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973

Procedure for Declaration of Fugitive Economic
Offender
(1) Where the Director of the Prevention of
Money-laundering Act, 2002 or any other officer
not below the rank of Deputy Director authorised
by the Director, has reason to believe that any
individual is a fugitive economic offender, he may
file an application in such form and prescribed
manner in the Special Court that such individual
may be declared as a fugitive economic offender


(2) The application shall contain-
(a) reasons for the belief that an individual is a
fugitive economic offender;
(b) any information available as to the
whereabouts of the fugitive economic offender;
(c) a list of properties or the value of such
properties believed to be the proceeds of crime,
including any such property outside India for
which confiscation is sought;
(d) a list of properties or benami properties
owned by the individual in India or abroad for
which confiscation is sought; and
(e) a list of persons who may have an interest in
any of the properties listed under clauses
(c) and (d) above.

(3) Where an application has been duly filed, the
Special Court shall issue a notice to an individual
who is alleged to be a fugitive economic
offender.

(4) The notice shall also be issued to any other
person who has any interest in the property
mentioned in the application.

(5) A notice of Special Court shall-
(a) require the individual to appear at a specified
place and time not less than six weeks from the
date of issue of such notice; and
(b) state that failure to appear on the specified
place and time shall result in a declaration of the
individual as a fugitive economic offender and
confiscation of property under the Act.
(6) A notice shall also be forwarded to such
authority, as the Central Government may notify,
for effecting service in a contracting State. The
authority shall make efforts to serve the notice
within a period of two weeks in such prescribed
manner
Contracting State means any country or place
outside India in respect of which arrangements
have been made by the Central Government
with the Government of such country through a
treaty or otherwise.

(7) A notice may also be served to the individual
alleged to be a fugitive economic offender by
electronic means to-
(a) his electronic mail address submitted in
connection with an application for allotment of
Permanent Account Number under section 139A
of the Income-tax Act, 1961;
(b) his electronic mail address submitted in
connection with an application for enrolment
under section 3 of the Aadhaar ; or
(c) any other electronic account as may be
prescribed
(8) Where any individual to whom notice has
been issued by the Special Court shall appears
in person at the place and time specified in the
notice, the Special Court may terminate the
proceedings under the Act.

(9) Where any individual to whom notice has
been issued fails to appear at the place and time
specified in the notice, but enters appearance
through counsel, the Special Court may in its
discretion give a period of one week to file a
reply to the application.

(10) Where any individual to whom notice has
been issued fails to enter appearance either in
person or through counsel, and the Special
Court is satisfied-
(a) that service of notice has been effected on
such party; or
(b) that notice could not be served in spite of
best efforts because such individual has evaded
service of notice, it may, after recording reasons
in writing, proceed to hear the application.

Declaration of Fugitive Economic Offender
Step 1: A Director appointed by the Central
Government is responsible for filing an
application to a special court in order to declare
the person as a Fugitive Economic Offender.
The application to be filed should possess the
following details:
 Reason to believe than an individual is a
fugitive economic offender
 Any information related to the fugitive economic
offender.
 Details and value of such properties including
any such property outside India for which
confiscation is made.
 Benami properties owned by an individual in
India or abroad for which confiscation is made.
 Details of the persons who have the interest to
purchase properties listed above.
Issuance of Notice
Step 2: Upon receipt of the application, the
Special Court will issue a notice to the Fugitive
Economic Offender.
Step 3: As specified in the notice, the individual
has to appear in person or through counsel. Step
4: If the Special Court is satisfied on the service
of notice the Special Court will records reasons
and hear the application.
Hearing of the Application
Step 5: Upon hearing the application, the Special
Court can declare the individual to be an FEO.
Step 6: If an individual is declared as an FEO,
then the Special Court is allowed to order
confiscation against the crime made by FEO in
India or abroad.
Consification Order
Step 7: The confiscation order will be handled by
the Central Government, along with the
identification details of the same.
Step 8: In the case that the Special Court
declares the person is not to be an FEO, then
the property seized will be ordered to be
released to the concerned person.
Appeal
Step 9: However, the Director can appeal to the
Concerned High Court within thirty 30 days
against the order of the Special Court

Power to Disallow Civil Claims and Attachment
Of Property
 The Act allows any civil court or tribunal to
prohibit a declared fugitive economic offender
from filing or defending any civil claim.
 Further, any company or limited liability
partnership where such a person is a majority
shareholder, promoter, or a key managerial
person, may also be barred from filing or
defending civil claims.
 Director or any other officer, not below the rank
of Deputy Director, authorised by the Director,
may, by an order in writing, at any time prior to
the filing of the application to the Special Court,
attach any property-
* for which there is a reason to believe that the
property is proceeds of crime, or is a property or
benami property owned by an individual who is a
fugitive economic offender; and
* which is being or is likely to be dealt with in a
manner which may result in the property being
unavailable for confiscation.
 Director or any other officer who provisionally
attaches any property shall within a period of 30
days from the date of such attachment, file an
application before the Special Court
 The attachment of any property shall continue
for a period of one hundred and eighty days from
the date of order of attachment or such other
period as may be extended by the Special Court
before the expiry of such period.

Power of Survey

Where a Director or any other officer authorised
by the Director, on the basis of material in his
possession, has reason to believe that an
individual may be a fugitive economic offender,
he may enter any place:
(i) within the limits of the area assigned to him; or
(ii) in respect of which he is authorised for the
purposes of this section, by such other authority,
who is assigned the area within which such place
is situated

The Director or any other officer authorised by
him may request any proprietor, employee or any
other person who may be present at that time,
to-
(a) afford him the necessary facility to inspect
such records as he may require and which may
be available at such place;
(b) afford him the necessary facility to check or
verify the proceeds of crime or any transaction
related to proceeds of crime which may be found
therein; and
(c) furnish such information as he may require as
to any matter which may be useful for, or
relevant to any proceedings .

The Director, or any other officer acting under
this section may:
(i) place marks of identification on the records
inspected by him and make or cause to be made
extracts or copies therefrom;
(ii) make an inventory of any property checked or
verified by him; and
(iii) record the statement of any person present
at the property which may be useful for, or
relevant to, any proceeding

Search and Seizure
Where the Director or any other officer not below
the rank of Deputy Director authorised by him,
on the basis of information in his possession,
has reason to believe (the reason for such belief
to be recorded in writing) that any person:
(i) may be declared as a fugitive economic
offender;
(ii) is in possession of any proceeds of crime;
(iii) is in possession of any records which may
relate to proceeds of crime; or
(iv) is in possession of any property related to
proceeds of crime, then, subject to any rules
made in this behalf, he may authorise any officer
subordinate to him to-
(a) enter and search any building, place, vessel,
vehicle or aircraft where he has reason to
suspect that such records or proceeds of crime
are kept;
(b) break open the lock of any door, box, locker,
safe, almirah or other receptacle for exercising
the powers conferred by clause (a) where the
keys thereof are not available;
(c) seize any record or property found as a result
of such search;
(d) place marks of identification on such record
or property, if required or make or cause to be
made extracts or copies therefrom;
(e) make a note or an inventory of such record or
property; and
(f) examine on oath any person, who is found to
be in possession or control of any record or
property, in respect of all matters relevant for the
purposes of any investigation under this Act.

Appeals
(1) An appeal shall lie from any judgment or
order, not being an interlocutory order, of a
Special Court to the High Court both on facts
and on law.

(2) Every appeal under this section shall be
preferred within a period of thirty days from the
date of the judgment or order appealed from:
Provided that the High Court may entertain an
appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty
days, if it is satisfied that the appellant had
sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal
within the period of thirty days:
Provided further that no appeal shall be
entertained after the expiry of period of ninety
days.

Lesson 10: Law relating to Benami Transactions
& Prohibition
Introduction
The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988
provides that
a) all the properties held benami shall be subject
to acquisition by such authority in such manner
and after following such procedure as may be
prescribed;
b) no amount shall be payable for the acquisition
of any property held benami;
c) the purchase of property by any person in the
name of his wife or unmarried daughter for their
benefit would not be benami transaction;
d) the securities held by a depository as
registered owner under the provisions of the
Depositories Act, 1996 or participant as an agent
of a depository would not be benami
transactions.
The amended law empowers the specified
authorities to provisionally attach benami
properties which can eventually be confiscated.

Salient Features of the Benami Transactions
(Prohibition) Act, 1988
 It defines a benami transaction and benami
property and also provides for exclusions and
transactions which shall not be construed
benami.
 It provides the consequences of entering into a
prohibited benami transactions. It lays down the
procedure for determination and related penal
consequences in the case of a prohibited
benami transaction.
 It also provides that the powers of civil court
shall be available to authorities under the said
Act.
 Miscellaneous Provisions have been provided
for service of notice, protection of action taken in
good faith, etc. Central Government empowers
to make rules for the implementation of the
provisions of the Act.
 It enables the Central Government in
consultation with the Chief Justice of the High
Court to designate one or more Courts of
Session as Special Court or Special Courts for
the purpose of the Act.
 It provides penalty for entering into benami
transactions and for furnishing any false
documents in any proceeding under the Act.
 It provides for transfer of any suit or proceeding
in respect of a benami transaction pending in any
court (other than High Court) or Tribunal or
before any authority to the
Appellate Tribunal.




IMPORTANT DEFINITIONS
Attachment
[Section 2(5)]
Attachment means the prohibition of transfer,
conversion, disposition or movement of property,
by an order issued under the Act.
Benami Property
Benami Property means any property which is
the subject matter of a benami transaction and
also includes the proceeds from such property.
Benami
Transaction
Section 2 (9)
(A) a transaction or an arrangement -
(a) where a property is transferred to, or is held
by, a person, and the consideration for such
property has been provided, or paid by, another
person; and
(b) the property is held for the immediate or
future benefit, direct or indirect, of the person
who has provided the consideration,
Except when the property is held by -
(i) a Karta, or a member of a Hindu undivided
family, as the case may be, and the property is
held for his benefit or benefit of other members
in the family and the consideration for such
property has been provided or paid out of the
known sources of the Hindu undivided family;
(ii) a person standing in a fiduciary capacity for
the benefit of another person towards whom he
stands in such capacity and includes a trustee,
executor, partner, director of a company, a
depository or a participant as an agent of a
depository under the Depositories Act, 1996 and
any other person as may be notified by the
Central Government for this purpose;
(iii) any person being an individual in the name
of his spouse or in the name of any child of such
individual and the
consideration for such property has been
provided or paid out of the known sources of the
individual;
(iv) any person in the name of his brother or
sister or lineal ascendant or descendant, where
the names of brother or sister or lineal ascendant
or descendant and the individual appear as
jointowners in any document, and the
consideration for such property has been
provided or paid out of the known sources of the
individual; or
(B) a transaction or an arrangement in respect of
a property carried out or made in a fictitious
name(For Example: Mr. X purchases a property
in the name of Mr. Y, who is non-existent.); or
(C) a transaction or an arrangement in respect of
a property where the owner of the property is not
aware of, or, denies knowledge of, such
ownership(Mr. X is holding a flat in the name of
Mr. Y. Upon inquiry by authorities, Mr. Y denies
the ownership of the flat); (D) a transaction or an
arrangement in respect of a property where the
person providing the consideration is not
traceable or is fictitious(Mr. A purchased a flat,
payment of which was made by an unknown
person)
                                                    Benamidar
                                                    means a         be, in whose
                                                    person or a     name the benami
                                                    fictitious      property is
                                                    person, as      transferred or held
                                                    the case may    and includes a
                                                    [Section        person who lends
Benamidar                                           2(10)]          his name

Beneficial Beneficial Owner" means a person,
whether his identity is known
                                                    or not, for
                                                    whose benefit
                                                    the benami
                                                    property is
Owner" [Section                                     held by a
2(10)]                                              benamidar

Prohibition of benami transactions
 As per Section 3(1) of the Act, no person shall
enter into any benami transaction.
 Section 3(2) provides that whoever enters into
any benami transaction shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years or with fine or with both.
 According to Section 3(3) where any person
enters into any benami transaction on and after
the date of commencement of the Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Amendment
Act, 2016, shall be punishable in accordance
with the provisions contained in Chapter
VII.
if a person is found guilty of offence of benami
transaction by the competent court, he shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term
not less than one year but which may extend to 7
years and shall also be liable to fine which may
extend to 25% of the fair market value of the
property.

Prohibition of the right to recover property held
benami
Section 4(1) provides that no suit, claim or action
to enforce any right in respect of any property
held benami against the person in whose name
the property is held or against any other person
shall lie by or on behalf of a person claiming to
be the real owner of such property. Further,
Section 4(2) provides that no defense based on
any right in respect of any property held benami,
whether against the person in whose name the
property is held or against any other person,
shall be allowed in any suit, claim or action by or
on behalf of a person claiming to be the real
owner of such property.

As per section 5 of the Act any property, which is
subject matter of benami transaction, shall be
liable to be confiscated by the Central
Government.

Prohibition on re-transfer of property by
benamidar
Section 6 provides that a person, being a
benamidar shall not re-transfer the benami
property held by him to the beneficial owner or
any other person acting on his behalf.
Where any property is re-transferred in
contravention of the above the transaction of
such property shall be deemed to be null and
void.

The following are few of the officers who shall
assist the authorities in the enforcement of the
Act, namely:
(a) income-tax authorities appointed under
section 117(1) of the Income-tax Act, 1961;
(b) officers of the Customs and Central Excise
Departments;
(c) officers appointed under section 5(1) of the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act, 1985
(d) officers of the stock exchange recognised
under section 4 of the Securities Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1956 ;
(e) officers of the Reserve Bank of India
constituted under section 3(1) of the Reserve
Bank of India Act, 1934;
(f) police;


Notice and attachment of property involved in
benami transaction - Section 24
(1) the Initiating Officer, on the basis of material
in his possession, has reason to believe that any
person is a benamidar in respect of a property,
he may, after recording reasons in writing, issue
a notice to such person to show cause within
such time as may be specified in the notice why
the property should not be treated as benami
property.
(2) A copy of the notice may also be served upon
such other person who is a beneficial owner.
(3) Where the Initiating Officer is of the opinion
that the person in possession of the property
held benami may alienate such property during
the period specified in the notice, he may, with
the previous approval of the Approving Authority,
by order in writing, attach provisionally such
property in the manner as may be prescribed, for
a period not exceeding ninety days from the date
of issue of notice under sub-section
(1).
(4) The Initiating Officer, after making such
inquires and calling for such reports or evidence
as he deems fit, shall within a period of ninety
days from the date of issue of notice under sub-
section (1),
a. where the provisional attachment has been
made under sub-section (3), -
i. pass an order continuing the provisional
attachment of the property with the prior
approval of the Approving Authority, till the
passing of the order by the Adjudicating
Authority under subsection (3) of section 26; or
ii. revoke the provisional attachment of the
property with the prior approval of the Approving
Authority;
b. where provisional attachment has not been
made under sub-section (3),
i. pass an order provisionally attaching the
property till the passing of the order made by the
Adjudicating Authority
ii. decide not to attach the property as specified
in the notice.

(5) the Initiating Officer passes an order
continuing the provisional attachment of the
property under section 24(4) he shall, within
fifteen days from the date of the attachment,
draw up a statement of the case and refer it to
the Adjudicating Authority Manner of service of
notice
Section 25 deals with the manner of service of
notice. Sub-section (1) of this section provides
that a notice under sub-clause (1) of section 24
may be served on the person named therein
either by post or as if it were a summons issued
by a Court under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908

Sub-section (2) of this section provides that any
notice referred to above may be addressed-
(i) in case of an individual, to such individual;
(ii) in the case of a firm, to the managing partner
or the manager of the firm;
(iii) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, to
karta or any member of such family;
(iv) in the case of a company, to the principal
officer thereof;
(v) in the case of any other association or body
of individuals, to the principal officer or any
member thereof;
(vi) in the case of any other person (not being an
individual), to the person who manages or
controls his affairs

Adjudication of benami property (Section 26)
1) The Adjudicating Authority shall issue notice,
to furnish such documents, particulars or
evidence as is considered necessary on a date
to be specified therein, on the following persons:-
(1) The person specified as a benamidar therein
(2) Any person referred to as the beneficial
owner therein or identified as such
(3) Any interested party, including a banking
company
(4) Any person who has made a claim in respect
of the property
However, the Adjudicating Authority shall issue
notice within a period of thirty days from the date
on which a reference has been received. Further,
the notice shall provide a period of time of not
less than thirty days to the person to whom such
notice is issued to furnish the information sought.
2) Where such property is held jointly by more
than one person, the Adjudicating Authority shall
make endeavours to serve notice to all persons
holding such property.
However, where the notice is served on one of
the aforesaid persons the service of notice shall
not be invalid on the ground that the said notice
was not served to all the persons holding the
property.
3) the Adjudicating Authority shall, after
considering the reply, if any, provide an
opportunity of being heard to the person
specified as a benamidar therein, the Initiating
Officer, and any other person who claims to be
the owner of such property. Thereafter, the
Adjudicating
Authority shall pass an order holding the
property not to be a benami property and
revoking the attachment order; or holding the
property to be a benami property and confirming
the attachment order in all other cases.
4) If the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that
some part of the properties in respect of which
reference has been made to him is benami
property, but is not able to specifically identify
such part, he shall record a finding to the best of
his judgment as to which part or properties is
held benami.
5) in the course of proceedings before it, the
Adjudicating Authority has reason to believe that
a property, other than a property referred to him
by the Initiating Officer is benami property, it
shall provisionally attach the property and the
property shall be deemed to be a property
referred to it on the date of receipt of the
reference under sub-section (5) of section 24
6) the Adjudicating Authority may, at any stage
of the proceedings, either on the application of
any party, or suo moto, strike out the name of
any party improperly joined or add the name of
any person whose presence before the
Adjudicating Authority may be necessary to
enable it to adjudicate upon and settle all the
questions involved in the reference
7) no order under sub-section (3) shall be passed
after the expiry of one year from the end of the
month in which the reference under section 24
was received.

Confiscation and vesting of benami property
Section 27 deals with confiscation and vesting of
benami property.
 Sub-section (1) of this section provides that
where an order is passed in respect of any
property under sub-section (3) of section 26
holding such property to be a benami property,
the Adjudicating Authority shall, after giving an
opportunity of being heard to the person
concerned, make an order confiscating the
property held to be a benami property.
However, where an appeal has been filed
against the order of the Adjudicating Authority,
the confiscation of property shall be made
subject to the order passed by the Appellate
Tribunal under section 46.
 Above shall not apply to a property held or
acquired by a person from the benamidar for
adequate consideration, prior to the issue of
notice without his having knowledge of the
benami transaction. [sub-section 2]
 Where an order of confiscation has been made,
all the rights and title in such property shall vest
absolutely in the Central Government free of all
encumbrances and no compensation shall be
payable in respect of such confiscation. [sub-
section 3] Possession of the property
Section 29 relates to possession of the property.
 Sub-section (1) of this section provides that
where an order of confiscation in respect of a
property under subsection (1) of section 27 has
been made, the Administrator shall proceed to
take the possession of such property.
 Sub-section (2) of this section provides that the
Administrator shall, -
a) by notice in writing, order within seven days of
the date of the service of notice any person, who
may be in possession of the benami property, to
surrender or deliver possession thereof to the
Administrator or any other person duly
authorised in writing by him in this behalf;
b) in the event of non-compliance of the order
referred to in clause (a), or if in his opinion,
taking over of immediate possession is
warranted, for the purpose of forcibly taking over
possession, requisition the service of any police
officer to assist him and it shall be the duty such
officer to comply with the requisition.
It may be noted that Administrator" means an
Income-tax Officer as defined in clause
(25) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
Party aggrieved by any decision or order of the
Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the High
Court within 60 days from the date of
communication of the decision or order of the
Appellate Tribunal to him on any question of law
arising out of such order.
High Court may entertain any appeal after the
said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that the
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from
filing the appeal within the period specified in
sub-section (1).

Special Courts
Section 50 relates to Special Courts. Sub-section
(1) of this section provides that the Central
Government, in consultation with the Chief
Justice of the High Court, shall for trial of an
offence punishable under this Act, by notification,
designate one or more Courts of Session as
Special Court or Special Courts for such area or
areas or for such case or class or group of cases
as may be specified in the notification.

Offences by Companies
Section 62 relates to consequences in case of
offences by companies.
 Subsection (1) of this section provides that
where a person committing a contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule,
direction or order made thereunder is a
company, every person who, at the time the
contravention was committed, was in charge of,
and was responsible to, the company, for the
conduct of the business of the company as well
as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of
the contravention and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
 Sub-section (2) of this section provides that
nothing contained in subsection (1) of this
section shall render any person liable to
punishment, if he proves that the contravention
took place without his knowledge.
 Sub-section (3) of this section provides that
notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (1), where a contravention of any of the
provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or
order made thereunder has been committed by a
company and it is proved that the contravention
has taken place with the consent or connivance
of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of
any director, manager, secretary or other officer
of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also


Lesson 11: Competition Law
What is competition in the market?
Term 'competition' is not defined under the
Competition Act
a situation in a market in which firms or sellers
independently strive for the buyers' patronage in
order to achieve a particular business objective,
for example, profits, sales or market share.. -The
World Bank
Competition is a complex and technical subject
which does not lend itself to easy summary or
concise clarification.
Competition can be defined as a process of
economic rivalry between market players to
attract customers.




Need for amendments: Background
 Significant growth of Indian markets and a
paradigm shift in the way businesses operate
 The Government of India constituted
Competition Law Review Committee (CLRC) in
2018, to examine and suggest the modifications
in the Competition Act, 2002
 CLRC submitted its recommendations to the
Government in 2019
 After review of the recommendations proposed
by CLRC and public consultations, amendments
to the law were mooted
 The aim was to provide regulatory certainty and
trust-based business environment

OBJECTIVES
 To provide trustbased business environment
 To provide regulatory certainty

than the person who buys such goods for
consideration paid or promised or partly paid or
partly promised, or under any system of deferred
payment when such use is made with the
approval of such person, whether such purchase
of goods is for resale or for any commercial
purpose or for personal use;

(ii) hires or avails of any services for a
consideration which has been paid or promised
or partly paid and partly promised, or under any
system of deferred payment and includes any
beneficiary of such services other than the
person who hires or avails of the services for
consideration paid or promised, or partly paid
and partly promised, or under any system of
deferred payment, when such services are
availed of with the approval of the firstmentioned
person whether such hiring or availing of
services is for any commercial purpose or for
personal use;
                                                         Director
                                                         General
                                                         means the
                                                         Director
                                                         General
                                                         appointed
(g) "Director                                            under
General" sub- section (1) of section 16 and
includes any Additional, Joint, Deputy or
Assistant Directors General appointed under that
section
**(h) "enterprise" "a person or a department of
the Government, including units, divisions,
subsidiaries,
-who or which is, or has been, engaged in
 any economic activity, relating to the
production, storage, supply, distribution,
acquisition or control of articles or goods, or the
provision of services, of any kind, or
 in investment, or
 in the business of acquiring, holding,
underwriting or dealing with shares, debentures
or other securities of any other body corporate,
either directly or through one or more of its units
or divisions or subsidiaries,
 but does not include any activity of the
Government relatable to the sovereign functions
of the Government including all activities carried
on by the departments of the Central
Government dealing with atomic energy,
currency, defence and space;"


(r) "relevant "relevant market" means the market
which may be determined by market" the
commission with reference to the relevant
product market or
the relevant geographic market or with reference
to both the markets;
**'(t) "relevant "relevant product market" means a
market comprising of all those product market"
products or services-
(i) which are regarded as inter-changeable or
substitutable by the consumer, by reason of
characteristics of the products or services, their
prices and intended use; or
(ii) the production or supply of, which are
regarded as interchangeable or substitutable by
the supplier, by reason of the ease of switching
production between such products and services
and marketing them in the short term without
incurring significant additional costs or risks in
response to small and permanent changes in
relative prices
(s) "relevant "relevant geographic market" means
a market comprising the area geographic in
which the conditions of competition for supply of
goods or market" provision of services or
demand of goods or services are distinctly
homogenous and can be distinguished from the
conditions
prevailing in the neighbouring areas;
                                                   service
                                                   means
                                                   service of any
                                                   description
                                                   which is
                                                   made
(u) "service"                                      available
to potential users and includes the provision of
services in connection with business of any
industrial or commercial matters such as
banking, communication, education, financing,
insurance, chit funds, real estate, transport,
storage, material treatment, processing, supply
of electrical or other energy, boarding, lodging,
entertainment, amusement, construction, repair,
conveying of news or information and
advertising;



Anti-competitive agreements (Sec 3)
Sec 3(1) No enterprise or association of
enterprises or person or association of persons
shall enter into any agreement in respect of
production, supply, distribution, storage,
acquisition or control of goods or provision of
services, which causes or is likely to cause an
appreciable adverse effect on competition within
India.

Sec 3(2) Any agreement entered into in
contravention of the provisions contained in
subsection (1) shall be void.

Sec 3(3) Any agreement entered into between
enterprises or associations of enterprises or
persons or associations of persons or between
any person and enterprise or practice carried on,
or decision taken by, any association of
enterprises or association of persons, including
cartels, engaged in identical or similar trade of
goods or provision of services, which-
(a) directly or indirectly determines purchase or
sale prices;
(b) limits or controls production, supply, markets,
technical development, investment or provision
of services;
(c) shares the market or source of production or
provision of services by way of allocation of
geographical area of market, or type of goods or
services, or number of customers in the market
or any other similar way;
(d) directly or indirectly results in bid rigging or
collusive bidding, shall be presumed to have an
appreciable adverse effect on competition:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-
section shall apply to any agreement entered
into by way of joint ventures if such agreement
increases efficiency in production, supply,
distribution, storage, acquisition or control of
goods or provision of services.
Provided further that an enterprise or association
of enterprises or a person or association of
persons though not engaged in identical or
similar trade shall also be presumed to be part of
the agreement under this sub-section if it
participates or intends to participate in the
furtherance of such agreement.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-
section, bid rigging" means any agreement,
between enterprises or persons referred to in
sub-section (3) engaged in identical or similar
production or trading of goods or provision of
services, which has the effect of eliminating or
reducing competition for bids or adversely
affecting or manipulating the process for bidding

Sec 3(4) Any other agreement amongst
enterprises or persons including but not
restricted to agreement amongst enterprises or
persons at different stages or levels of the
production chain in different markets, in respect
of production, supply, distribution, storage, sale
or price of, or trade in goods or provision of
services, including-


(a) tie-in arrangement;
(b) exclusive supply agreement;
(c) exclusive distribution agreement;
(d) refusal to deal;
(e) resale price maintenance

(a) "tie-in arrangement" includes any agreement
requiring a purchaser of goods or services, as a
condition of such purchase, to purchase some
other distinct goods or services;

(b) "exclusive dealing agreement" includes any
agreement restricting in any manner the
purchaser or the seller, as the case may be, in
the course of his trade from acquiring or selling
or otherwise dealing in any goods or services
other than those of the seller or the purchaser or
any other person, as the case may be

(c) "exclusive distribution agreement" includes
any agreement to limit, restrict or withhold the
output or supply of any goods or services or
allocate any area or market for the disposal or
sale of the goods or services;

(d) "refusal to deal" includes any agreement
which restricts, or is likely to restrict, by any
method the persons or classes of persons to
whom goods or services are sold or from whom
goods or services are bought;

(e) "resale price maintenance" "includes, in case
of any agreement to sell goods or provide
services, any direct or indirect restriction that the
prices to be charged on the resale by the
purchaser shall be the prices stipulated by the
seller unless it is clearly stated that prices lower
than those prices may be charged.

Abuse of dominant position (Sec 4)
dominant position means a position of strength,
enjoyed by an enterprise, in the relevant market,
in India, which enables it to-
(i) operate independently of competitive forces
prevailing in the relevant market; or
(ii) affect its competitors or consumers or the
relevant market in its favour.

predatory price means the sale of goods or
provision of services, at a. price which is below
the cost, as may be determined by regulations,
of production of the goods or provision of
services, with a view to reduce competition or
eliminate the competitors

Sec 4(1) No enterprise or group shall abuse its
dominant position.
Sec4(2) There shall be an abuse of dominant
position if an enterprise or a group.-- (a) directly
or indirectly, imposes unfair or discriminatory- (i)
condition in purchase or sale of goods or
service; or
(ii) price in purchase or sale (including predatory
price) of goods or service.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this clause,
the unfair or condition in purchase or sale of
goods or service referred to in sub-clause (i) and
unfair or discriminatory price in purchase or sale
of goods (including predatory price) or service
referred to in sub-clause (ii) shall not include
such discriminatory condition or price which may
be adopted to meet the competition;
(b) limits or restricts-
(i) production of goods or provision of services or
market therefor; or
(ii) technical or scientific development relating to
goods or services to the prejudice of consumers;
or
(c) indulges in practice or practices resulting in
denial of market access or
(d) makes conclusion of contracts subject to
acceptance by other parties of supplementary
obligations which, by their nature or according to
commercial usage, have no connection with the
subject of such contracts; or
(e) uses its dominant position in one relevant
market to enter into, or protect, other relevant
market.

Division of enterprise enjoying dominant position
The Commission may, direct division of an
enterprise enjoying dominant position to ensure
that such enterprise or group does not abuse its
dominant position.
The order of the Commission referred to above
may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely -
(a) the transfer or vesting of property, rights,
liabilities or obligations;
(b) the adjustment of contracts either by
discharge or reduction of any liability or
obligation or otherwise;
(c) the creation, allotment, surrender or
cancellation of any shares, stocks or securities;
(d) the formation or winding up of an enterprise
or the amendment of the memorandum of
association or articles of association or any other
instruments regulating the business of any
enterprise;
(e) the extent to which, and the circumstances in
which, provisions of the order affecting an
enterprise may be altered by the enterprise and
the registration thereof;
(f) any other matter which may be necessary to
give effect to the division of the enterprise or
group
Combination (Sec5)
Combination has broad coverage and includes
acquisition of control, shares, voting rights,
assets, merger or amalgamation. Unless
exempted, Commission's approval is mandatory
under the Act, if jurisdictional thresholds in terms
of assets or turnover either in India or in India
and outside India, as the case may be (as set
out in the table below), of the combining parties
are met.


Regulation of Combinations (sec6)
Section 6 of the Competition Act prohibits any
person or enterprise from entering into a
combination which causes or is likely to cause
an appreciable adverse effect on competition
within the relevant market in India and if such a
combination is formed, it shall be void.
Combinations can be both horizontal and
vertical. Horizontal combinations are considered
to have more adverse effect on competition in
relevant market due to consolidation. Section
6(2) envisages that any person or enterprise,
who or which proposes to enter into any
combination, shall give a notice to the
Commission disclosing details of the proposed
combination, in the form, prescribed and submit
the form together with the fee prescribed by

regulations. Such intimation should be submitted
"after any of the following, but before
consummation of the combination -
(a) approval of the proposal relating to merger or
amalgamation, referred to in Section 5(c), by the
board of directors of the enterprise concerned
with such merger or amalgamation, as the case
may be;
(b) execution of any agreement or other
document for acquisition referred to in Section
5(a) or acquiring of control referred to in Section
5(b)

No combination shall come into effect until 180
days have passed from the day on which the
notice has been given to the Commission under
sub-section(2) or the Commission has passed
orders under section 31, whichever is earlier

COMPETITION COMMISSION OF INDIA
Composition of Commission (Sec8)
 The Commission consists of a Chairperson and
not less than two and not more than six other
Members.
 The Chairperson and the Members are to be
appointed by the Central Government
 The Chairman and other Members, shall be
person of ability, integrity and standing and who
has special knowledge of and such professional
experience of not less than fifteen years in
international trade, economics, business,
commerce, law, finance, accountancy,
management, industry, technology, public affairs
or competition matters including competition law
and policy which in the opinion of the Central
Government, may be useful to the Commission.

Sec 12. (1) The Chairperson and other Members
shall, for a period of two years from the date on
which they cease to hold office, not accept any
employment in or advise as a consultant,
retainer or in any other capacity whatsoever, or
be connected with the management or
administration of-
(a) any enterprise which is or has been a party to
a proceeding before the Commission under this
Act; or
(b) any person who appears or has appeared
before the Commission under section 35.
Sec 12 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained
in section 35, the Chairperson or any other
Member after retirement or otherwise ceasing to
be in service for any reason shall not represent
for any person or enterprise before the
Commission: Provided that nothing contained in
this section shall apply to any employment under
the Central Government or a
State Government or local authority or in any
statutory authority or any corporation established
by or under any Central, State or Provincial Act
or a Government company as defined in clause
(45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013.

Duties of Commission
Sec 18 Subject to the provisions of this Act, it
shall be the duty of the Commission
 to eliminate practices having adverse effect on
competition,
 promote and sustain competition,
 protect the interests of consumers and
 ensure freedom of trade carried on by other
participants, in markets in India: Provided that
the Commission may, for the purpose of
discharging its duties or performing its functions
under this Act, enter into any memorandum or
arrangement with the prior approval of the
Central Government, with any agency of any
foreign country: Provided further that, the
Commission may, for the purpose of discharging
its duties or performing its functions under this
Act, enter into any memorandum or arrangement
with any statutory authority or department of
Government.".

Appointment of Director General (Sec16)
 Director General is an important functionary
under the Act.
 He is to assist the Commission in conducting
inquiry into contravention of any of the provisions
of the Act and for performing such other
functions as are, or may be, provided by or under
the Act.
 Section 16 (1) empowers the Central
Government to appoint a Director General and
such number of additional, joint, deputy or
assistant Director Generals or other advisers,
consultants or officers for the purposes of
assisting the Commission in conducting inquiry
into the contravention of any provision of the Act.
Additional, joint, deputy and assistant Director
Generals, other advisors, consultants and
officers shall however, exercise powers and
discharge functions subject to the general
control, supervision and directions of the Director
General.
 The salary, allowances and other terms and
conditions and service of Director General,
consultants, advisors or other officers assisting
him shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
 The Director General, advisers, consultants
and officers assisting him are to be appointed
from amongst the persons of integrity and
outstanding ability and who have experience in
investigation, and knowledge of accountancy,
management, business, public administration,
international trade, law or economics and such
other qualifications as may be prescribed.
 The Commission may appoint a Secretary and
such officers and other employees, as it
considers necessary for the efficient
performance of his functions under the Act.

Duties of Director General
The Act provides that the Director General when
so directed by the Commission, is to assist the
Commission in investigation into any
contravention of the provisions of this Act. The
Director General is bound to comply with such a
direction to render requisite assistance to the
Commission.
The Director General, in order to effectively
discharge his functions, has been given the
same powers as are conferred upon the
Commission under section 36(2) same powers
as are vested in Civil Court under the Code of
Civil Procedure (1908) while trying a suit namely;
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of
any person and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of
documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of
witnesses or documents;
(e) subject to the provisions of Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, requisitioning any public record or
document or copy of such record or document
from any office

Inquiry into certain agreements and dominant
position of enterprise (Sec19) The Commission
may inquire into any alleged contravention of
Section 3(1) or 4(1) on its own motion or on
(a) receipt of any information in such manner
and accompanied by such fee, from any person,
consumer or consumer association or trade
association; or
(b) a reference made to it by the Central
Government or State Government or a statutory
authority.
Provided that the Commission shall not entertain
an information or a reference unless it is filed
within three years from the date on which the
cause of action has arisen:
Provided further that an information or a
reference may be entertained after the period
specified in the first proviso if the Commission is
satisfied that there had been sufficient cause for
not filing the information or the reference within
such period after recording its reasons for
condoning such delay

Section 19(3) provides that while determining
whether an agreement has appreciable adverse
effect on competition, the Commission shall give
due regard to all or any of the following factors,
namely-
(a) creation of barriers to new entrants in the
market;
(b) driving existing competitors out of the market;
(c) foreclosure of competition;
(d) benefits or harm to consumers;
(e) improvements in production or distribution of
goods or provision of services;
(f) promotion of technical, scientific and
economic development by means of production
or distribution of goods or provision of services.

For the purpose of determining whether an
enterprise enjoys dominant position or not under
Section 4, the Commission shall have due
regard to all or any of the following factors,
namely-
(a) market share of the enterprise;
(b) size and resources of the enterprise;
(c) size and importance of the competitors;
(d) economic power of the enterprise including
commercial advantages over competitors;
(e) vertical integration of the enterprises or sale
or service network of such enterprises;
(f) dependence of consumers on the enterprise;
(g) monopoly or dominant position whether
acquired as a result of any statute or by virtue of
being a Government company or a public sector
undertaking or otherwise;
(h) entry barriers including barriers such as
regulatory barriers, financial risk, high capital
cost of entry, marketing entry barriers, technical
entry barriers, economies of scale, high cost of
substitutable goods or service for consumers;
i) countervailing buying power;
j) market structure and size of market;
k) social obligations and social costs;
l) relative advantage, by way of the contribution
to the economic development, by the enterprise
enjoying a dominant position having or likely to
have an appreciable adverse effect on
competition
m) any other factor which the Commission may
consider relevant for the inquiry.

Relevant Market
The terms 'relevant market' and relevant
geographic market" have been defined in
Sections 2(r) and 2(s) of the Act.
For determining the "relevant geographic
market", the Commission shall have due regard
to all or any of the following factors, namely:-
(a) regulatory trade barriers;
(b) local specification requirements;
(c) national procurement policies;
(d) adequate distribution facilities;
(e) transport costs;
(f) language;
(g) consumer preferences;
(h) need for secure, regular supplies or rapid
after-sales service
(i) characteristics of goods or nature of services;
(j) costs associated with switching supply or
demand to other areas
.
While determining 'relevant product market' the
Commission shall have due regard to all or any
of the following factors namely;
(a) physical characteristics or end-use of goods
or the nature of services;
(b) price of goods or service;
(c) consumer preferences;
(d) exclusion of in-house production;
(e) existence of specialized producers;
(f) classification of industrial products
(g) costs associated with switching demand or
supply to other goods or services;
(h) categories of customers.

The Commission shall have due regard to all or
any of the factors for the purposes of
determining whether the combination would have
the effect of or is likely to have an appreciable
adverse effect on competition in the relevant
market, namely
(a) actual and potential level of competition
through imports in the market;
(b) extent of barriers to entry into the market;
(c) level of combination in the market;
(d) degree of countervailing power in the market;
(e) likelihood that the combination would result in
the parties to the combination being able to
significantly and sustainably increase prices or
profit margins;
(f) extent of effective competition likely to sustain
in a market;
(g) extent to which substitutes are available or
are likely to be available in the market; (h)
market share, in the relevant market, of the
persons or enterprise in a combination,
individually and as a combination;
(i) likelihood that the combination would result in
the removal of a vigorous and effective
competitor or competitors in the market;
(j) nature and extent of vertical integration in the
market;
(k) possibility of a failing business;
(l) nature and extent of innovation;
(m) relative advantage, by way of the
contribution to the economic development, by
any combination having or likely to have
appreciable adverse effect on competition;
(n) whether the benefits of the combination
outweigh the adverse impact of the combination,
if any.

Acts taking place outside India but having an
effect on Competition in India
Section 32 extends the jurisdiction of
Competition Commission of India to inquire and
pass orders in accordance with the provisions of
the Act into an agreement or dominant position
or combination, which is likely to have, an
appreciable adverse effect on competition in
relevant market in India, notwithstanding that,
(a) an agreement referred to in Section 3 has
been entered into outside India; or
(b) any party to such agreement is outside India;
or
(c) any enterprise abusing the dominant position
is outside India; or
(d) a combination has taken place outside India;
or
They may either appear in person or authorise
any of the following:
(a) a chartered accountant who has obtained a
certificate of practice; or
(b) a company secretary who has obtained a
certificate of practice;

(c) a cost accountant who has obtained a
certificate of practice;
(d) a legal practitioner that is an advocate, vakil
or an attorney of any High Court including a
pleader in practice

Competition Advocacy
Section 49 of the Competition Act, 2002 provides
that while formulating a policy on competition
including review of laws related to competition,
the central Government may make a referee to
the ACCI for its opinion on the possible effects of
such a policy on competition.
The Commission shall within 60 days of receipt
of such a reference, given its opinion on it to the
Central Government. Thereafter the central
Government may formulate such policy as it
deems fit It may be noted that the rule of the
Commission is advisory and the opinion given by
it shall not be binding on the Central
Government.
The CCI had also been assigned the role to take
prescribed suitable measures for the
following;
* Promotion of competition advocacy;
* Creating awareness about the competition; and
* Imparting training about competition issues.
Creating awareness about benefits of
competition and imparting training in competition
issues is expected to generate conducive
environment to promote and foster competition,
which is sine-qua non for accelerating economic
growth.

Competition Appellate Tribunal
Section 53A empowers the Central Government
to establish by notification an Appellate
Tribunal to be known as Competition Appellate
Tribunal -
a) to hear and dispose of appeals against any
direction issued or decision made or order
passed by the Commission under the Act.
b) to adjudicate on claim of compensation.

Section 53D provides that the Chairperson of the
Appellate Tribunal shall be a person, who is, or
has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or the
Chief Justice of a High Court. The Chairperson
or a member of the Appellate Tribunal shall hold
office as such for a term of five years from the
date on which he enters upon his office, and
shall be eligible for reappointment. However, no
Chairperson or other member of the Appellate
Tribunal shall hold office as such after he has
attained,
 in the case of the Chairperson, the age of sixty-
eight years;
 in the case of any other member of the
Appellate Tribunal, the age of sixty-five years.

Execution of orders of the Commission imposing
monetary penalty
Section 39 provides that if a person fails to pay
any monetary penalty imposed on him under the
Act, the Commission shall proceed to recover
such penalty, in such manner as may be
specified by the regulations. In a case where the
Commission is of the opinion that it would be
expedient to recover the penalty imposed under
the Act in accordance with the provisions of the
Income-tax Act, 1961, it may make a reference
to this effect to the concerned incometax
authority under that Act for recovery of the
penalty as tax due under the said Act.




Rectification of orders
The Commission may amend any order passed
by it under the provisions of this Act with a view
to rectifying any mistake apparent from the
record. Section 38(2) provides that subject to
other provisions of this Act, the Commission may
make -
(a) an amendment of an order of its own motion;
(b) an amendment for rectifying any mistake
apparent from record, which has been brought to
its notice by any party to the order.
An explanation below the Section clarifies that
while rectifying any mistake apparent from the
record, the Commission shall not amend
substantive part of the order passed by it under
the provisions of this Act

Finance, Accounts and Audit Constitution of
Fund
The Act provides for the constitution of a fund
called the "Competition Fund" for meeting the
establishment and other expenses of the
Competition Commission in connection with the
discharge of its functions and for the purposes of
this Act. The following shall be credited to the
"Competition Fund", -
(a) all government grants received by the
commission;
(b) Omitted
(c) the fees received under the Act;
(d) the interest on the amounts accrued on the
monies referred under clauses (a) to (c). Fee
realized alongwith notice disclosing combination
shall form part of 'Competition Fund'. The Fund
shall be administered by a Committee of such
Members of the Commission, as may be
determined by the Chairperson and the
Committee so appointed, shall spend monies out
of the Fund only for the objects for which the
Fund has been constituted.
Accounts and Audit
Proper accounts and other relevant records shall
be maintained by the Commission and an annual
statement of accounts shall be prepared by it in
prescribed form in consultation with the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
(CAG).The CAG shall specify the intervals within
which the accounts of the Commission shall be
audited by him.
Explanation to Section 52(2) clarifies that the
orders passed by the Commission, being matters
appealable to the Supreme Court, shall not be
subject to audit by the CAG. The expenses, if
any, incurred in connection with such audit shall
be payable by the Commission to the CAG




Penalties Contravention of orders of
Commission [Section 42]
If any person fails to comply with the orders or
directions of the Commission the Act, he shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to 7 1
Lakh for each day during which such non
compliance occurs subject to a maximum of 10
Crore.
If any person does not comply with the orders or
directions or fails to pay the fine imposed then he
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to 3 years or with fine up to 25
Crore or with both as the Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate may deem fit However, the Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate can take cognizance of
any offence only on a complaint filed by the
Commission or any of its officers.
Compensation in case of contravention of orders
of Commission [Section 42A] Any person may
make an application to the Appellate Tribunal for
an order for the recovery of compensation from
any enterprise for any loss or damage shown to
have been suffered, by such person as a result
of the said enterprise violating directions issued
by the Commission or contravening, without any
reasonable ground, any decision or order of the
Commission issued under sections 27, 28, 31,
32 & 33 or any condition or restriction subject to
which any approval, sanction, direction or
exemption in relation to any matter has been
accorded, given, made or granted under the Act
or delaying in carrying out such orders or
directions of the Commission.
Penalty for failure to directions of Commission &
Director General [Section 43] If any person fails
to comply with a direction given by the
Commission or the Director General then such
person shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to Rs 1 lakh for each day comply with
during which such failure continues subject to a
maximum of 1 Crore
Power to impose information on combinations
[Section 43A]
If any person or enterprise who fails to give
notice to the Commission under Section 6(2)
penalty for non- then the Commission shall
impose a penalty which may extend to 1% of
total turnover or furnishing of assets whichever is
higher of such a combination.

CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT 2019


The Consumer Protection Bill, 2019 was passed
by the Lok Sabha on 30th July, 2019 and by
Rajya Sabha on 06th August, 2019 respectively.
The Consumer Protection Act, 2019 received the
assent of the President on the 9th August, 2019.
The Consumer Protection Act, 2019 replaced the
more than 3 decades old Consumer Protection
Act, 1986.

Preamble of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019
provides for protection of the interests of
consumers and for the said purpose, to establish
authorities for timely and effective administration
and settlement of consumers' disputes and for
matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.

Definitions
Advertisement (Sec 2(1))
Any audio or visual publicity, representation,
endorsement or pronouncement made by means
of light, sound, smoke, gas, print, electronic
media, internet or website and includes any
notice, circular, label, wrapper, invoice or such
other documents.

Appropriate Laboratory (Sec 2(2))
A laboratory or an organisation
1. Recognised by the CG; or
2. recognised by a SG, subject to such
guidelines as may be issued by the CG in this
behalf; or
3. Established by or under any law for the time
being in force, which is maintained, financed or
aided by the CG or a SG for carrying out
analysis or test of any goods with a view to
determining whether such goods suffer from any
defect.

Central Authority (Sec 2(4))
Central Authority means the Central Consumer
Protection Authority.

Complainant (Sec 2(5))
i. A consumer; or
ii. Any voluntary consumer association
registered under any law for the time being
in force; or
iii. The CG or any SG; or
iv. The Central Authority; or
v. One or more consumers, where there are
numerous consumers having the same
interest; or
vi. In case of death of a consumer, his legal heir
or legal representative; or
vii. In case of a consumer being a minor, his
parent or legal guardian.

Complaint (Sec 2(6))
Complaint means any allegation in writing, made
by a complainant for obtaining any relief
provided by or under this Act, that
i. An unfair contract or unfair trade practice or a
restrictive trade practice has been adopted by
any trader or service provider;
ii. The goods bought by him or agreed to be
bought by him suffer from one or more defects;
iii. The services hired or availed of or agreed to
be hired or availed of by him suffer from any
deficiency;
iv. A trader or a service provider, as the case
may be, has charged for the goods or for the
services mentioned in the complaint, a price in
excess of the price
a. fixed by or under any law for the time being in
force; or
b. displayed on the goods or any package
containing such goods; or
v. The services which are hazardous or likely to
be hazardous to life and safety of the public
when used, are being offered by a person who
provides any service and who knows it to be
injurious to life and safety;
vi. A claim for product liability action lies against
the product manufacturer, product seller or
product service provider, as the case may be.

Consumer (Sec 2(7))
Consumer means any person who
i. buys any goods for a consideration which has
been paid or promised or partly paid and partly
promised, or under any system of deferred
payment and includes any user of such goods
other than the person who buys such goods for
consideration paid or promised or partly paid or
partly promised, or under any system of deferred
payment, when such use is made with the
approval of such person, but does not include a
person who obtains such goods for resale or for
any commercial purpose; or
ii. hires or avails of any service for a
consideration which has been paid or promised
or partly paid and partly promised, or under any
system of deferred payment and includes any
beneficiary of such service other than the person
who hires or avails of the services for
consideration paid or promised, or partly paid
and partly promised, or under any system of
deferred payment, when such services are
availed of with the approval of the first
mentioned person, but does not include a person
who avails of such service for any commercial
purpose.
Here commercial purpose does not include =
use by a person of goods bought and used by
him exclusively for the purpose of earning his
livelihood, by means of self-employment;

Buys any goods" and "hires or avails any
services" includes offline or online transactions
through electronic means or by teleshopping or
direct selling or multi-level marketing.
only if the goods have
been purchased for being used in some profit
making activity on a large -scale, and there is
close and direct nexus between the purchase of
goods and the profit-making activity.
Laxmi Engineering Works v. P.S.G. Industrial
Institute
Supreme Court observed that whether the
purpose for which a person has bought goods
circumstances of each case. If the commercial
use is by the purchaser himself for the purpose
of earning his livelihood by means of self-
employment such purchaser of goods would yet
be a consumer. The Supreme Court further
observed that if a person purchased a machine
to operate it himself for earning his livelihood, he
would be a consumer. If such person took the
assistance of one or two persons to assist him in
operating the machine, he would still be a
consumer. But if a person purchases a machine
and appoint or engage another person
exclusively to operate the machine, then such
person would not be a consumer.

Bhupendra Jang Bahadur Guna v. Regional
Manager and Others
the National Commission held that a tractor
purchased primarily to till the land of the
purchaser and let out on hire during the idle time
to till the lands of others would not amount to
commercial use.
under the Act was decided in the affirmative by
the State Commission in Andhra Pradesh in the
case of A Narasamma v. LIC of India. The State
Commission held that as the term
services for consideration, the widow being the
beneficiary of serv under the Act entitled to be
compensated for the loss suffered by her due to
negligence of the LIC.
Laxmiben Laxmichand Shah v. Sakerben Kanji
Chandan and others
The Supreme Court held that the tenant entering
into lease agreement with the landlord cannot be
considered as consumer. Where there was no
provision in the lease agreement in respect of
cleaning, repairing and maintaining the building,
the rent paid by tenant is not the consideration
for availing these services and therefore, no
question of deficiency in service.
Goods, means goods as defined in the Sale of
Goods Act,1930. As per Section 2(7) of the Sale
of Goods Act, 1930 Goods means every kind of
movable property other than actionable claims
and money; and includes stock and shares,
growing crops, grass and things attached to or
forming part of the land, which are agreed to be
severed before sale or under the contract of
sale. Therefore, most consumer products come
under the purview of this definition.
Note: Goods also include Food.
Morgan Stanley Mutual Fund v. Kartik Das
The Supreme Court held that an application for
allotment of shares cannot constitute goods. It is
after allotment, rights may arise as per the
articles of association of the company. At the
stage of application there is no purchase of
goods for consideration and again the purchaser
cannot be called the hirer of services for
consideration.

Consumer dispute (sec 2(8))
Consumer dispute means a dispute where the
person against whom a complaint has been
made, denies or disputes the allegations
contained in the complaint.

Consumer rights [Sec 2(9)]
Consumer rights include
i. The right to be protected against the marketing
of goods, products or services which are
hazardous to life and property;
ii. The right to be informed about the quality,
quantity, potency, purity, standard and price of
goods, products or services, as the case may be,
so as to protect the consumer against unfair
trade practices;
iii. The right to be assured, wherever possible,
access to a variety of goods, products or
services at competitive prices;
iv. The right to be heard and to be assured that
consumer's interests will receive due
consideration at appropriate forum;
v. The right to seek redressal against unfair
trade practice or restrictive trade practices or
unscrupulous exploitation of consumers; and
vi. The right to consumer awareness.
Defect [Sec 2(10)]
Defect means any fault, imperfection, or
shortcoming in quality , quantity, potency, purity
or standard which is required to be maintained
by or under any law for the time being in force or
under any contract, express or implied or as is
claimed by the trader in any manner whatsoever
in relation to any goods or product and the
expression "defective" shall be construed
accordingly.

Deficiency (Sec 2(11))
Deficiency means any fault, imperfection,
shortcoming or inadequacy in the quality, nature
and manner of performance which is required to
be maintained by or under any law for the time
being in force or has been undertaken to be
performed by a person in pursuance of a
contract or otherwise in relation to any service
and includes
i. any act of negligence or omission or
commission by such person which causes loss
or injury to the consumer; and
ii. deliberate withholding of relevant information
by such person to the consumer.
Design (Sec 2(12))
Design in relation to a product, means the
intended or known physical and material
characteristics of such product and includes any
intended or known formulation or content of such
product and the usual result of the intended
manufacturing or other process used to produce
such product.

Direct selling (Sec 2(13))
Direct selling means marketing, distribution and
sale of goods or provision of services through a
network of sellers, other than through a
permanent retail location.

District Commission (Sec 2(15))
District Commission means a District Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission established.

Electronic Service Provider (Sec 2(17))
Electronic service provider means a person who
provides technologies or processes to enable a
product seller to engage in advertising or selling
goods or services to a consumer and includes
any online market place or online auction sites.

Endorsement (Sec 2(18))
Endorsement in relation to an advertisement,
means
i. any message, verbal statement,
demonstration; or
ii. depiction of the name, signature, likeness or
other identifiable personal characteristics of an
individual; or
iii. depiction of the name or seal of any institution
or organisation, which makes the consumer to
believe that it reflects the opinion, finding or
experience of the person making such
endorsement.
Establishment (Sec 2(19))
Establishment includes an advertising agency,
commission agent, manufacturing, trading or any
other commercial agency which carries on any
business, trade or profession or any work in
connection with or incidental or ancillary to any
commercial activity, trade or profession, or such
other class or classes of persons including public
utility entities in the manner as may be
prescribed.

Express Warranty (Sec 2(20))
Express warranty means any material statement,
affirmation of fact, promise or description relating
to a product or service warranting that it
conforms to such material statement, affirmation,
promise or description and includes any sample
or model of a product warranting that the whole
of such product conforms to such sample or
model.
Harm (Sec 2(22))
Harm in relation to a product liability, includes
i. damage to any property, other than the product
itself;
ii. personal injury, illness or death;
iii. mental agony or emotional distress attendant
to personal injury or illness or damage to
property; or
iv. any loss of consortium or services or other
above loss.
but shall not include any harm caused to a
product itself or any damage to the property on
account of breach of warranty conditions or any
commercial or economic loss, including any
direct, incidental or consequential loss relating
thereto.

Injury (Sec 2(23))
Any harm whatever illegally caused to any
person, in body, mind or property.

Manufacturer (Sec 2(24))
Manufacturer means a person who
i. makes any goods or parts thereof; or
ii. assembles any goods or parts thereof made
by others; or
iii. puts or causes to be put his own mark on any
goods made by any other person.
Misleading Advertisement (Sec 2(28))
Misleading Advertisement in relation to any
product or service, means an advertisement,
which
i. falsely describes such product or service; or
ii. gives a false guarantee to, or is likely to
mislead the consumers as to the nature,
substance, quantity or quality of such product or
service; or
iii. conveys an express or implied representation
which, if made by the manufacturer or seller or
service provider thereof, would constitute an
unfair trade practice; or
iv. deliberately conceals important information.
Person (Sec 2(31)) includes
i. an individual;
ii. a firm whether registered or not;
iii. a Hindu undivided family; iv. a co-operative
society;
v. an association of persons;
vi. any corporation, company or a BOI whether
incorporated or not;
vii. any artificial juridical person.
Product (Sec 2(33))
Any article or goods or substance or raw material
or any extended cycle of such product, which
may be in gaseous, liquid, or solid state
possessing intrinsic value which is capable of
delivery either as wholly assembled or as a
component part and is produced for introduction
to trade or commerce, but does not include
human tissues, blood, blood products and
organs.

Product Liability (Sec 2(34))
The responsibility of a product manufacturer or
product seller, of any product or service, to
compensate for any harm caused to a consumer
by such defective product manufactured or sold
or by deficiency in services relating thereto.

Product manufacturer (Sec 2(36))
Product manufacturer means a person who
i. makes any product or parts thereof; or
ii. assembles parts thereof made by others; or
iii. puts or causes to be put his own mark on any
products made by any other person; or
iv. makes a product and sells, distributes, leases,
installs, prepares, packages, labels, markets,
repairs, maintains such product or is otherwise
involved in placing such product for commercial
purpose; or
v. designs, produces, fabricates, constructs or
re-manufactures any product before
its sale; or
vi. being a product seller of a product, is also a
manufacturer of such product;
Product Seller
Product seller in relation to a product, means a
person who, in the course of business, imports,
sells, distributes, leases, installs, prepares,
packages, labels, markets, repairs, maintains, or
otherwise is involved in placing such product for
commercial purpose and includes
i. A manufacturer who is also a product seller; or
ii. A service provider, but does not include
a) A seller of immovable property, unless such
person is engaged in the sale of constructed
house or in the construction of homes or flats;
b) A provider of professional services in any
transaction in which, the sale or use of a product
is only incidental thereto, but furnishing of
opinion, skill or services being the essence of
such transaction;
c) A person who
I. acts only in a financial capacity with respect to
the sale of the product;
II. is not a manufacturer, wholesaler, distributor,
retailer, direct seller or an electronic service
provider;
III. leases a product, without having a reasonable
opportunity to inspect and discover defects in the
product, under a lease arrangement in which the
selection, possession, maintenance, and
operation of the product are controlled by a
person other than the lessor.
Restrictive Trade Practice (Sec 2(41))
A trade practice which tends to bring about
manipulation of price or its conditions of delivery
or to affect flow of supplies in the market relating
to goods or services in such a manner as to
impose on the consumers unjustified costs or
restrictions and shall include
i. Delay beyond the period agreed to by a trader
in supply of such goods or in providing the
services which has led or is likely to lead to rise
in the price;
ii. Any trade practice which requires a consumer
to buy, hire or avail of any goods or, as the case
may be, services as condition precedent for
buying, hiring or availing of other goods or
services.
Service (Sec 2(42))
Service of any description which is made
available to potential users and includes, but not
limited to, the provision of facilities in connection
with banking, financing, insurance, transport,
processing, supply of electrical or other energy,
telecom, boarding or lodging or both, housing
construction, entertainment, amusement or the
purveying of news or other information, but does
not include the rendering of any service free of
charge or under a contract of personal service.

Indian Merchants Association v. V P Shantha,
The Supreme Court observed that a contract for
service implies a contract whereby one party
undertakes to render services e.g. professional
or technical services to or for another in the
performance of which he is not subject to
detailed direction and control but exercises
professional or technical skill and uses his own
knowledge and discretion. A contract of service
on the other hand implies relationship of master
and servant and involves an obligation to obey
orders in the work to be performed and as to its
mode and manner of performance. The
Parliamentary draftsman was well aware of this
well-
reason being that an employer could not be
regarded as a consumer in respect of the
services rendered by his employee in pursuance
of contract of employment. By affixing excluded
were not altered.
Spurious Goods - which are falsely claimed to be
genuine.
State Commission - A State Consumer Disputes
Redressal Commission
Trader (Sec 2(45))
Trader in relation to any goods, means a person
who sells or distributes any goods for sale and
includes the manufacturer thereof, and where
such goods are sold or distributed in package
form, includes the packer thereof.
Unfair Contract (Sec 2(46))
Unfair contract means a contract between a
manufacturer or trader or service provider on one
hand, and a consumer on the other, having such
terms which cause significant change in the
rights of such consumer, including the following,
namely:
i. requiring manifestly excessive security
deposits to be given by a consumer for the
performance of contractual obligations; or
ii. imposing any penalty on the consumer, for the
breach of contract thereof which is wholly
disproportionate to the loss occurred due to such
breach to the other party to the contract; or
iii. refusing to accept early repayment of debts
on payment of applicable penalty; or iv. entitling
a party to the contract to terminate such contract
unilaterally, without reasonable cause; or
v. permitting or has the effect of permitting one
party to assign the contract to the detriment of
the other party who is a consumer, without his
consent; or
vi. imposing on the consumer any unreasonable
charge, obligation or condition which puts such
consumer to disadvantage;
Unfair Trade Practice (Sec 2(47))
A trade practice which, for the purpose of
promoting the sale, use or supply of any goods
or for the provision of any service, adopts any
unfair method or unfair or deceptive practice
including any of the following practices, namely:

(i) making any statement, whether orally or in
writing or by visible representation including by
means of electronic record, which
a) falsely represents that the goods are of a
particular standard, quality, quantity, grade,
composition, style or model;
b) falsely represents that the services are of a
particular standard, quality or grade;
c) falsely represents any re-built, second-hand,
renovated, reconditioned or old goods as new
goods;
d) represents that the goods or services have
sponsorship, approval, performance,
characteristics, accessories, uses or benefits
which such goods or services do not have;
e) represents that the seller or the supplier has a
sponsorship or approval or affiliation which such
seller or supplier does not have;
f) makes a false or misleading representation
concerning the need for, or the usefulness of,
any goods or services;
g) gives to the public any warranty or guarantee
of the performance, efficacy or length of life of a
product or of any goods that is not based on an
adequate or proper test thereof:
Provided that where a defence is raised to the
effect that such warranty or guarantee is based
on adequate or proper test, the burden of proof
of such defence shall lie on the person raising
such defence;
h) makes to the public a representation in a form
that purports to be
a. A warranty or guarantee of a product or of any
goods or services; OR
b. A promise to replace, maintain or repair an
article or any part thereof or to repeat or continue
a service until it has achieved a specified result,
if such purported warranty or guarantee or
promise is materially misleading or if there is no
reasonable prospect that such warranty,
guarantee or promise will be carried out;
i) materially misleads the public concerning the
price at which a product or like products or goods
or services, have been or are, ordinarily sold or
provided, and, for this purpose, a representation
as to price shall be deemed to refer to the price
at which the product or goods or services has or
have been sold by sellers or provided by
suppliers generally in the relevant market unless
it is clearly specified to be the price at which the
product has been sold or services have been
provided by the person by whom or on whose
behalf the representation is made;
j) gives false or misleading facts disparaging the
goods, services or trade of another person.
A statement that is,
a) expressed on an article offered or displayed
for sale, or on its wrapper or container; or
b) expressed on anything attached to, inserted
in, or accompanying, an article offered or
displayed for sale, or on anything on which the
article is mounted for display or sale; or
c) contained in or on anything that is sold, sent,
delivered, transmitted or in any other manner
whatsoever made available to a member of the
public,
shall be deemed to be a statement made to the
public by, and only by, the person who had
caused the statement to be so expressed, made
or contained;
(ii) permitting the publication of any
advertisement, whether in any newspaper or
otherwise, including by way of electronic record,
for the sale or supply at a bargain price of goods
or services that are not intended to be offered for
sale or supply at the bargain price, or for a period
that is, and in quantities that are, reasonable,
having regard to the nature of the market in
which the business is carried on, the nature and
size of business, and the nature of the
advertisement.
bargain price means,
A. a price that is stated in any advertisement to
be a bargain price, by reference to an ordinary
price or otherwise; or
B. a price that a person who reads, hears or
sees the advertisement, would reasonably
understand to be a bargain price having regard
to the prices at which the product advertised or
like products are ordinarily sold;
(iii) Permitting
a) The offering of gifts, prizes or other items with
the intention of not providing them as offered or
creating impression that something is being
given or offered free of charge when it is fully or
partly covered by the amount charged, in the
transaction as a whole;
b) The conduct of any contest, lottery, game of
chance or skill, for the purpose of promoting,
directly or indirectly, the sale, use or supply of
any product or any business interest, except
such contest, lottery, game of chance or skill as
may be prescribed;
c) Withholding from the participants of any
scheme offering gifts, prizes or other items free
of charge on its closure, the information about
final results of the scheme.
Explanation.For the purpose of this sub-clause,
the participants of a scheme shall be deemed to
have been informed of the final results of the
scheme where such results are within a
reasonable time published, prominently in the
same newspaper in which the scheme was
originally advertised;
(iv) permitting the sale or supply of goods
intended to be used, or are of a kind likely to be
used by consumers, knowing or having reason to
believe that the goods do not comply with the
standards prescribed by the competent authority
relating to performance, composition, contents,
design, constructions, finishing or packaging as
are necessary to prevent or reduce the risk of
injury to the person using the goods;
(v) permitting the hoarding or destruction of
goods, or refusal to sell the goods or to make
them available for sale or to provide any service,
if such hoarding or destruction or refusal raises
or tends to raise or is intended to raise, the cost
of those or other similar goods or services;
(vi) manufacturing of spurious goods or offering
such goods for sale or adopting deceptive
practices in the provision of services;
(vii) not issuing bill or cash memo or receipt for
the goods sold or services rendered in such
manner as may be prescribed;
(viii) refusing, after selling goods or rendering
services, to take back or withdraw defective
goods or to withdraw or discontinue deficient
services and to refund the consideration thereof,
if paid, within the period stipulated in the bill or
cash memo or receipt or in the absence of such
stipulation, within 30 days;
(ix) disclosing to other person any personal
information given in confidence by the consumer
unless such disclosure is made in accordance
with the provisions of any law for the time being
in force.
CONSUMER PROTECTION COUNCIL
Central Consumer Protection Council
Establishment by: Central Government.

Function as: It shall be an advisory council and
Composition: Minister-in-charge of the
Department of Consumer Affairs, who shall be
the Chairperson; and prescribed number of other
official or non-official members representing
prescribed interests.
Meeting: as and when necessary, but at least
one meeting shall be held every year.
Time & Place of meeting: As the Chairperson
may think fit.
Objects: To render advice on promotion and
protection of the consumers' rights under the
Act.

State Consumer Protection Councils
Establishment: By State Government.
Function: It shall be an advisory council and
Composition: Minister-in-charge of Consumer
Affairs in the State Government who shall be the
Chairperson; Prescribed number of other official
or non-official members representing Prescribed
interests and such number of other official or
non-official members, not exceeding 10, as may
be nominated by the CG.
Meeting: As and when necessary but at least 2
meetings shall be held every year.
Time & Place: As the Chairperson may think fit.
Objects: To render advice on promotion and
protection of consumer rights within the
State.

District Consumer Protection Council
Establishment: By State Government.
Function: It shall be an advisory council.
Composition: The Collector of the district, who
shall be the Chairperson; and prescribed number
of other official and non-official members
representing prescribed interests.
Meeting: as and when necessary but at least 2
meetings shall be held every year.
Time & Place: As the Chairperson may think fit.
Objects: To render advice on promotion and
protection of consumer rights within the
District.

CENTRAL CONSUMER PROTECTION
AUTHORITY (CCPA) (Sec 10) Establishment of
CCPA: To be established by CG.
Objective: To regulate matters relating to
violation of rights of consumers, unfair trade
practices and false or misleading advertisements
which are prejudicial to the interests of public
and consumers and to promote, protect and
enforce the rights of consumers as a class.
Composition: chief commissioner and prescribed
number of other Commissioners, to be
appointed by the CG to exercise the powers and
discharge the functions under the Act.
Headquarter: Delhi
Regional & other offices: as CG may decide.
Qualifications, method of recruitment, etc., of
Chief Commissioner and Commissioners : Rules
may be made by CG.
Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of
Central Authority
                                                      a) any
                                                      vacancy in, or
                                                      any defect in
                                                      the
                                                      constitution
No act or proceeding of the Central Authority         of, the Central
shall be invalid merely by reason of                  Authority; or
b) any defect in the appointment of Chief
Commissioner or Commissioner; or
c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Central
Authority not affecting the merits of the case.

Appointment of officers, experts, professionals
and other employees of Central
Authority (Sec 13)
i. The CG shall provide the Central Authority
such number of officers and other employees as
it considers necessary for the efficient
performance of its functions under this Act.
ii. The salaries and allowances payable to, and
the other terms and conditions of service of, the
officers and other employees of the Central
Authority appointed under this Act shall be such
as may be prescribed.
iii. The Central Authority may engage, in
accordance with the procedure specified by
regulations, such number of experts and
professionals of integrity and ability, who have
special knowledge and experience in the areas
of consumer rights and welfare, consumer
policy, law, medicine, food safety, health,
engineering, product safety, commerce,
economics, public affairs or administration, as it
deems necessary to assist it in the discharge of
its functions under this Act.
Procedure of Central Authority
The Central Authority shall regulate the
procedure for transaction of its business and
allocation of its business amongst the Chief
Commissioner and Commissioners as may be
specified by regulations. The Chief
Commissioner shall have the powers of general
superintendence, direction and control in respect
of all administrative matters of the Central
Authority.
Chief Commissioner may delegate such of his
powers relating to administrative matters of the
Central Authority, as he may think fit, to any
Commissioner (including Commissioner of a
regional office) or any other officer of the Central
Authority.
Investigation Wing of Central Authority
1. The Central Authority shall have an
Investigation Wing headed by a Director General
for the purpose of conducting inquiry or
investigation under this Act as may be directed
by the Central Authority.
2. The Central Government may appoint a
Director General and such number of
Additional Director General, Director, Joint
Director, Deputy Director and Assistant Director,
from amongst persons who have experience in
investigation and possess such qualifications, in
such manner, as may be prescribed.
3. Every Additional Director General, Director,
Joint Director, Deputy Director and Assistant
Director shall exercise his powers, and discharge
his functions, subject to the general control,
supervision and direction of the Director-
General.
4. The Director General may delegate all or any
of his powers to the Additional Director General
or Director, Joint Director or Deputy Director or
Assistant Director, as the case may be, while
conducting inquiries or investigations under this
Act.
5. The inquiries or the investigations made by
the Director General shall be submitted to the
Central Authority in such form, in such manner
and within such time, as may be specified by
regulations.

Power of District Collector (Sec 16)
The District Collector may, on a complaint or on
a reference made to him by the Central Authority
or the Commissioner of a regional office, inquire
into or investigate complaints regarding violation
of rights of consumers as a class, on matters
relating to violations of consumer rights, unfair
trade practices and false or misleading
advertisements, within his jurisdiction and submit
his report to the Central Authority or to the
Commissioner of a regional office, as the case
may be.


Complaints to Authorities
A complaint relating to violation of consumer
rights or unfair trade practices or false or
misleading advertisements which are prejudicial
to the interests of consumers as a class, may be
forwarded either in writing or in electronic mode,
to any one of the authorities, namely, the District
Collector or the Commissioner of regional office
or the Central Authority.

Powers and functions of Central Authority (Sec
18)
1. Central Authority have following power and
Functions -
a) protect, promote and enforce the rights of
consumers as a class, and prevent violation of
consumers rights under this Act;
b) prevent unfair trade practices and ensure that
no person engages himself in unfair trade
practices;
c) ensure that no false or misleading
advertisement is made of any goods or services
which contravenes the provisions of this Act or
the rules or regulations made thereunder;
d) ensure that no person takes part in the
publication of any advertisement which is false or
misleading.
2. The Central Authority may, for any of the
purposes aforesaid,
a) inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation to
be made into violations of consumer rights or
unfair trade practices, either suo-motu or on a
complaint received or on the directions from the
CG;
b) file complaints before the District Commission,
the State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be, under this Act;
c) intervene in any proceedings before the
District Commission or State Commission or
National Commission, as the case may be, in
respect of any allegation of violation of consumer
rights or unfair trade practices;
d) review the matters relating to, and the factors
inhibiting enjoyment of, consumer rights,
including safeguards provided for the protection
of consumers under any other law for the time
being in force and recommend appropriate
remedial measures for their effective
implementation;
e) recommend adoption of international
covenants and best international practices on
consumer rights to ensure effective enforcement
of consumer rights;
f) undertake and promote research in the field of
consumer rights;
g) spread and promote awareness on consumer
rights;
h) encourage non-Governmental organisations
and other institutions working in the field of
consumer rights to co-operate and work with
consumer protection agencies;
i) mandate the use of unique and universal
goods identifiers in such goods, as may be
necessary, to prevent unfair trade practices and
to protect consumers' interest;
j) issue safety notices to alert consumers against
dangerous or hazardous or unsafe goods or
services;
k) advise the Ministries and Departments of the
Central and State Governments on consumer
welfare measures;

l) issue necessary guidelines to prevent unfair
trade practices and protect consumers' interest.
Power of Central Authority to refer matter for
investigation or to other Regulator
(Sec 19)
1. The Central Authority may, after receiving any
information or complaint or directions from the
CG or of its own motion, conduct or cause to be
conducted a preliminary inquiry as to whether
there exists a prima facie case of violation of
consumer rights or any unfair trade practice or
any false or misleading advertisement, by any
person, which is prejudicial to the public interest
or to the interests of consumers and if it is
satisfied that there exists a prima facie case, it
shall cause investigation to be made by the
Director General or by the District Collector.
2. where, after preliminary inquiry, the Central
Authority is of the opinion that the matter is to be
dealt with by a Regulator established under any
other la w for the time being in force, it may refer
such matter to the concerned Regulator along
with its report.
3. For the purposes of investigation, the Central
Authority, the Director General or the District
Collector may call upon a person referred to in
Sec 19(1) and also direct him to produce any
document or record in his possession.
Power of Central Authority to recall goods (Sec
20)
Where the Central Authority is satisfied on the
basis of investigation that there is sufficient
evidence to show violation of consumer rights or
unfair trade practice by a person, it may pass
such order as may be necessary, including
a. recalling of goods or withdrawal of services
which are dangerous, hazardous or unsafe;
b. reimbursement of the prices of goods or
services so recalled to purchasers of such goods
or services; and
c. Discontinuation of practices which are unfair
and prejudicial to consumers' interest: Provided
that the Central Authority shall give the person
an opportunity of being heard before passing an
order under this section.
Power of Central Authority to issue directions
and penalties against false or misleading
advertisements (Sec 21)
Where the Central Authority is satisfied after
investigation that any advertisement is false or
misleading and is prejudicial to the interest of
any consumer or is in contravention of consumer
rights, it may, by order, issue directions to the
concerned trader or manufacturer or endorser or
advertiser or publisher, as the case may be, to
discontinue such advertisement or to modify the
same in such manner and within specified time.
If the Central Authority is of the opinion that it is
necessary to impose a penalty in respect of such
false or misleading advertisement, by a
manufacturer or an endorser, it may, by order,
impose on manufacturer or endorser a penalty
up-to Rs. 10 Lakh. The Central Authority may,
for every subsequent contravention by a
manufacturer or endorser, impose a penalty up-
to Rs. 50 Lakh.
Where the Central Authority deems it necessary,
it may, by order, prohibit the endorser of a false
or misleading advertisement from making
endorsement of any product or service for up-to
1 year. Central Authority may, for every
subsequent contravention, prohibit such
endorser from making endorsement in respect of
any product or service for up-to 3 years.
Where the Central Authority is satisfied after
investigation that any person is found to publish,
or is a party to the publication of, a misleading
advertisement, it may impose on such person a
penalty up-to Rs. 10 lakh.
No endorser shall be liable to a penalty, if he has
exercised due diligence to verify the veracity of
the claims made in the advertisement regarding
the product or service being endorsed by him.
No person shall be liable to such penalty if he
proves that he had publish ed or arranged for the
publication of such advertisement in the ordinary
course of his business: Provided that no such
defence shall be available to such person if he
had previous knowledge of the order passed by
the Central Authority for withdrawal or
modification of such advertisement.
While determining the penalty, regard shall be
had to the following, namely:
a) The population and the area impacted or
affected by such offence;
b) The frequency and duration of such offence;
c) The vulnerability of the class of persons likely
to be adversely affected by such offence; and
d) The gross revenue from the sales effected by
virtue of such offence.
The Central Authority shall give the person an
opportunity of being heard before an order is
passed.
Search and seizure (Sec 22)
For the purpose of conducting an investigation
after preliminary inquiry, the Director General or
any other officer authorised by him in this behalf,
or the District Collector, as the case may be,
may, if he has any reason to believe that any
person has violated any consumer rights or
committed unfair trade practice or causes any
false or misleading advertisement to be made,
shall,
a) enter at any reasonable time into any such
premises and search for any document or record
or article or any other form of evidence and seize
such document, record, article or such evidence;
b) make a note or an inventory of such record or
article; or
c) require any person to produce any record,
register or other document or article.
The provisions of the Cr. P.C, 1973, relating to
search and seizure shall apply.
Every document, record or article seized or
produced shall be returned within 20 days of the
date of such seizure or production, after copies
thereof or extracts therefrom certified by that
person, in such manner as may be prescribed,
have been taken.
Where any article seized are subject to speedy
or natural decay, the Director General or such
other officer may dispose of the article in such
manner as may be prescribed.
In the case of articles other than the articles of
speedy or natural decay, provisions contained in
section 38(2) (c) shall mutatis mutandis apply in
relation to analysis or tests.
which provides that if the complaint alleges a
defect in the goods which cannot be determined
without proper analysis or test of the goods,
obtain a sample of the goods from the
complainant, seal it and authenticate it in the
manner as may be prescribed and refer the
sample so sealed to the appropriate laboratory
along with a direction that such laboratory to
make an analysis or test, whichever may be
necessary, with a view to finding out whether
such goods suffer from any defect alleged in the
complaint or from any other defect and to report
its findings thereon to the District Commission
within 45 days of the receipt of the reference or
within such extended period as may be granted
by it.
Vexatious Search (sec 22)
The Director General or any other officer, who
knows that there are no reasonable grounds for
so doing, and yet
(a) searches, or causes to be searched any
premises; or
(b) seizes any record, register or other document
or article, shall, for every such offence, be
punished with imprisonment up-to 1 year, or with
fine up-to Rs. 10,000 or with both.
Designation of any statutory authority or body to
function as Central Authority (Sec 23)
The CG may, if it considers necessary, by
notification, designate any statutory authority or
body to exercise the powers and perform the
functions of the Central Authority.

Appeal (Sec 24)
A person aggrieved by any order passed by the
Central Authority may file an appeal to the
National Commission within 30 days from the
date of receipt of such order.

District Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission (Sec 28)
The State Government may establish a District
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, to
be known as the District Commission, in each
district of the State. State Government may also,
if it deems fit, establish more than one District
Commission in a district.

Each District Commission shall consist of
a. a President; and
b. at least 2 and not more than such number of
members as may be prescribed, in consultation
with the Central Government.
Qualifications of President and members of
District Commission
The CG may, by notification, make rules to
provide for the qualifications, method of
recruitment, procedure for appointment, term of
office, resignation and removal of the President
and members of the District Commission.

Jurisdiction of District Commission (Sec 34)
The District Commission shall have jurisdiction
to entertain complaints where the value of the
goods or services paid as consideration does not
exceed Rs. 1 Cr.

A complaint shall be instituted in a District
Commission within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction,
a. the opposite party or each of the opposite
parties, where there are more than 1, at the time
of the institution of the complaint, ordinarily
resides or carries on business or has a branch
office or personally works for gain; or
b. any of the opposite parties, where there are
more than one, at the time of the institution of the
complaint, actually and voluntarily resides, or
carries on business or has a branch office, or
personally works for gain, provided that in such
case the permission of the District Commission
is given; or
c. the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises; or
d. the complainant resides or personally works
for gain.
The District Commission shall ordinarily function
in the district headquarters and may perform its
functions at such other place in the district, as
the State Government may, in consultation with
the State Commission, notify in the Official
Gazette from time to time.
Manner in which complaint shall be made (Sec
35)
A complaint, in relation to any goods sold or
delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or
any service provided or agreed to be provided,
may be filed with a District Commission by
a. the consumer,
i. to whom such goods are sold or delivered or
agreed to be sold or delivered or such service is
provided or agreed to be provided; or
ii. who alleges unfair trade practice in respect of
such goods or service;
b. any recognised consumer association,
whether the consumer to whom such goods are
sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or
delivered or such service is provided or agreed
to be provided, or who alleges unfair trade
practice in respect of such goods or service, is a
member of such association or not;
c. one or more consumers, where there are
numerous consumers having the same interest,
with the permission of the District Commission,
on behalf of, or for the benefit of, all consumers
so interested; or
d. The CG, the Central Authority or the State
Government, as the case may be.
Note:
1. It may be noted that the complaint may be
filed electronically.
2. Every complaint filed shall be accompanied
with such fee and payable in such manner,
including electronic form, as may be prescribed.

Proceedings before District Commission (Sec
36)
Every proceeding before the District Commission
shall be conducted by the President of that
Commission and at-least 1 member thereof,
sitting together.
It may be noted that that where a member, for
any reason, is unable to conduct a proceeding till
it is completed, the President and the other
member shall continue the proceeding from the
stage at which it was last heard by the previous
member.
On receipt of a complaint, the District
Commission may, by order, admit the complaint
for being proceeded with or reject the same.
A complaint shall not be rejected unless an
opportunity of being heard has been given to the
complainant.
The admissibility of the complaint shall ordinarily
be decided within 21 days from the date on
which the complaint was filed.
Where the District Commission does not decide
the issue of admissibility of the complaint within
the period so specified, it shall be deemed to
have been admitted.
Reference to mediation (Sec 37)
At the first hearing of the complaint after its
admission, or at any later stage, if it appears to
the District Commission that there exists
elements of a settlement which may be
acceptable to the parties, except in such cases
as may be prescribed, it may direct the parties to
give in writing, within 5 days, consent to have
their dispute settled by mediation in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter V.
Where the parties agree for settlement by
mediation and give their consent in writing, the
District Commission shall, within five days of
receipt of such consent, refer the matter for
mediation, and in such case, the provisions of
Chapter V, relating to mediation, shall apply.
Procedure on admission of complaint (Sec 38)
(1) The District Commission shall, on admission
of a complaint, or in respect of cases referred for
mediation on failure of settlement by mediation,
proceed with such complaint.
(2) Where the complaint relates to any goods,
the District Commission shall,
a. refer a copy of the admitted complaint, within
21 days from the date of its admission to the
opposite party mentioned in the complaint
directing him to give his version of the case
within 30 days or such extended period not
exceeding 15 days as may be granted by it;
b. if the opposite party on receipt of a complaint
referred to him, denies or disputes the
allegations contained in the complaint, or omits
or fails to take any action to represent his case
within the time given by the District Commission,
proceed to settle the consumer dispute in any of
following manner;
c. if the complaint alleges a defect in the goods
which cannot be determined without proper
analysis or test of the goods, obtain a sample of
the goods from the complainant, seal it and
authenticate it in the manner as may be
prescribed and refer the sample so sealed to the
appropriate laboratory along with a direction that
such laboratory to make an analysis or test,
whichever may be necessary, with a view to
finding out whether such goods suffer from any
defect alleged in the complaint or from any other
defect and to report its findings thereon to the
District Commission within 45 days of the receipt
of the reference or within such extended period
as may be granted by it;
d. before any sample of the goods is referred to
any appropriate laboratory, require the
complainant to deposit to the credit of the
Commission such fees as may be specified, for
payment to the appropriate laboratory for
carrying out the necessary analysis or test in
relation to the goods in question;
e. remit the amount deposited to its credit to the
appropriate laboratory to enable it to carry out
the analysis or test and on receipt of the report
from the appropriate laboratory, it shall forward a
copy of the report along with such remarks as it
may feel appropriate to the opposite party;
f. if any of the parties disputes the correctness of
the findings of the appropriate laboratory, or
disputes the correctness of the methods of
analysis or test adopted by the appropriate
laboratory, require the opposite party or the
complainant to submit in writing his objections
with regard to the report made by the
appropriate laboratory;
g. give a reasonable opportunity to the
complainant as well as the opposite party of
being heard as to the correctness or otherwise of
the report made by the appropriate laboratory
and also as to the objection made in relation
thereto and issue an appropriate order.
(3) The District Commission shall, if the
complaint admitted by it under section 36 relates
to goods in respect of which the procedure
specified in sub-section (2) cannot be followed,
or if the complaint relates to any services,
(a) refer a copy of such complaint to the opposite
party directing him to give his version of the case
within a period of thirty days or such extended
period not exceeding fifteen days as may be
granted by the District Commission;
(b) if the opposite party, on receipt of a copy of
the complaint, referred to him under clause (a)
denies or disputes the allegations contained in
the complaint, or omits or fails to take any action
to represent his case within the time given by the
District Commission, it shall proceed to settle the
consumer dispute
(i) on the basis of evidence brought to its notice
by the complainant and the opposite party, if the
opposite party denies or disputes the allegations
contained in the complaint, or
(ii) ex parte on the basis of evidence brought to
its notice by the complainant, where the opposite
party omits or fails to take any action to
represent his case within the time given by the
Commission;
(c) decide the complaint on merits if the
complainant fails to appear on the date of
hearing.
(4) For the purposes of sub-sections (2) and (3),
the District Commission may, by order, require
an electronic service provider to provide such
information, documents or records, as may be
specified in that order.
5) No proceedings complying with the procedure
laid down in sub -sections (1) and (2) shall be
called in question in any court on the ground that
the principles of natural justice have not been
complied with.
(6) Every complaint shall be heard by the District
Commission on the basis of affidavit and
documentary evidence placed on record:
Provided that where an application is made for
hearing or for examination of parties in person or
through video conferencing, the District
Commission may, on sufficient cause being
shown, and after recording its reasons in writing,
allow the same.
(7) Every complaint shall be disposed of as
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall
be made to decide the complaint within a period
of three months from the date of receipt of notice
by opposite party where the complaint does not
require analysis or testing of commodities and
within five months if it requires analysis or testing
of commodities: Provided that no adjournment
shall ordinarily be granted by the District
Commission unless sufficient cause is shown
and the reasons for grant of adjournment have
been recorded in writing by the Commission:
Provided further that the District Commission
shall make such orders as to the costs
occasioned by the adjournment as may be
specified by regulations:
Provided also that in the event of a complaint
being disposed of after the period so specified,
the District Commission shall record in writing,
the reasons for the same at the time of disposing
of the said complaint.
(8) Where during the pendency of any
proceeding before the District Commission, if it
appears necessary, it may pass such interim
order as is just and proper in the facts and
circumstances of the case.
(9) For the purposes of this section, the District
Commission shall have the same powers as are
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit in respect of
the following matters, namely:
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance
of any defendant or witness and examining the
witness on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any
document or other material object as evidence;
(c) receiving of evidence on affidavits;
(d) the requisitioning of the report of the
concerned analysis or test from the appropriate
laboratory or from any other relevant source;
(e) issuing of commissions for the examination
of any witness, or document; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed by
the Central Government.
(10) Every proceeding before the District
Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193
and 228 of the Indian Penal Code, and the
District Commission shall be deemed to be a
criminal court for the purposes of section 195
and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.
(11) Where the complainant is a consumer
referred to in sub-clause (v) of clause (5) of
section 2, the provisions of Order I Rule 8 of the
First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 shall apply subject to the modification that
every reference therein to a suit or decree shall
be construed as a reference to a complaint or the
order of the District Commission thereon.
(12) In the event of death of a complainant who
is a consumer or of the opposite party against
whom the complaint has been filed, the
provisions of Order XXII of the First Schedule to
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall apply
subject to the modification that every reference
therein to the plaintiff and the defendant shall be
construed as reference to a complainant or the
opposite party, as the case may be.
Findings of District Commission (Sec 39)
1) Where the District Commission is satisfied
that the goods complained against suffer from
any of the defects specified in the complaint or
that any of the allegations contained in the
complaint about the services or any unfair trade
practices, or claims for compensation under
product liability are proved, it shall issue an order
to the opposite party directing him to do one or
more of the following, namely:
a. to remove the defect pointed out by the
appropriate laboratory from the goods in
question;
b. to replace the goods with new goods of similar
description which shall be free from any defect;
c. to return to the complainant the price, or, as
the case may be, the charges paid by the
complainant along with such interest on such
price or charges as may be decided;
d. to pay such amount as may be awarded by it
as compensation to the consumer for any loss or
injury suffered by the consumer due to the
negligence of the opposite party: Provided that
the District Commission shall have the power to
grant punitive damages in such circumstances
as it deems fit;
e. to pay such amount as may be awarded by it
as compensation in a product liability action
under Chapter VI;
f. to remove the defects in goods or deficiencies
in the services in question;
g. to discontinue the unfair trade practice or
restrictive trade practice and not to repeat them;
h. not to offer the hazardous or unsafe goods for
sale;
i. to withdraw the hazardous goods from being
offered for sale;
j. to cease manufacture of hazardous goods and
to desist from offering services which are
hazardous in nature;
k. to pay such sum as may be determined by it, if
it is of the opinion that loss or injury has been
suffered by a large number of consumers who
are not identifiable conveniently.
it may be noted that the minimum amount of sum
so payable shall not be less than 25% of the
value of such defective goods sold or service
provided, as the case may be, to such
consumers;
l. to issue corrective advertisement to neutralise
the effect of misleading advertisement at the
cost of the opposite party responsible for issuing
such misleading advertisement;
m. to provide for adequate costs to parties; and
n. to cease and desist from issuing any
misleading advertisement.

2) Any amount obtained shall be credited to such
fund and utilised in such manner as may be
prescribed.


3) In any proceeding conducted by the President
and a member and if they differ on any point or
points, they shall state the point or points on
which they differ and refer the same to another
member for hearing on such point or points and
the opinion of the majority shall be the order of
the District Commission. However, the other
member shall give his opinion on such point or
points referred to him within 1 month from the
date of such reference.
4) Every order made by the District Commission
shall be signed by the President and the member
who conducted the proceeding. Provided that
where the order is made as per majority opinion,
such order shall also be signed by the other
member.
Review by District Commission in Certain Case
(Sec 40)
The District Commission can review any of the
order passed by it if there is an error apparent on
the face of the record, either of its own motion or
on an application made by any of the parties
within thirty days of such order.

Appeal against order of District Commission
(Sec 41)
Any person aggrieved by an order made by the
District Commission may prefer an appeal
against such order to the State Commission on
the grounds of facts or law within 45 days from
the date of the order, in such form and manner,
as may be prescribed. It may be noted that the
State Commission may entertain an appeal after
the expiry of 45 days, if it is satisfied that there
was sufficient cause for not filing it within that
period.

There are certain restriction on appeal, unless
the person fulfil the following conditions namely-
No appeal by a person, who is required to pay
any amount in terms of an order of the District
Commission, shall be entertained by the State
Commission unless the appellant has deposited
50% of that amount in the manner as may be
prescribed.
No appeal shall lie from any order passed u/s
81(1) by the District Commission pursuant to a
settlement by mediation u/s 80.
State Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission (Sec 42)
The State Government to establish a State
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, to
be known as the State Commission, in the State.
The State Commission shall ordinarily function
at the State capital and perform its functions at
such other places as the State Government may
in consultation with the State Commission notify
in the Official Gazette. State Government also
empowers to establish regional benches of the
State Commission, at such places, as it deems
fit.

Each State Commission shall consist of
a. a President; and
b. not less than 4 or not more than prescribed
number of members as decided in consultation
with the CG.
Qualifications, etc., of President and members of
State Commission
The CG may, by notification, make rules to
provide for the qualification for appointment,
method of recruitment, procedure of
appointment, term of office, resignation and
removal of the President and members of the
State Commission.
Jurisdiction of State Commission (Sec 47) 1)
State Commission shall have jurisdiction a. to
entertain

i. complaints where the value of the goods or
services paid as consideration, exceeds Rs. 1
Cr, but does not exceed Rs. 10 Cr.: Provided
that where the CG deems it necessary so to do,
it may prescribe such other value, as it deems fit;
ii. complaints against unfair contracts, where the
value of goods or services paid as consideration
does not exceed Rs. 10 Cr.;
iii. appeals against the orders of any District
Commission within the State; and
(b) to call for the records and pass appropriate
orders in any consumer dispute which is pending
before or has been decided by any District
Commission within the State, where it appears to
the State Commission that such District
Commission has exercised a jurisdiction not
vested in it by law, or has failed to exercise a
jurisdiction so vested or has acted in exercise of
its jurisdiction illegally or with material
irregularity.
2) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the
State Commission may be exercised by Benches
thereof, and a Bench may be constituted by the
President with 1 or more members as the
President may deem fit. It may be noted that the
senior-most member shall preside over the
Bench.
3) Where the members of a Bench differ in
opinion on any point, the points shall be decided
according to the opinion of the majority, if there
is a majority, but if the members are equally
divided, they shall state the point or points on
which they differ, and make a reference to the
President who shall either hear the point or
points himself or refer the case for hearing on
such point or points by one or more of the other
members and such point or points shall be
decided according to the opinion of the majority
of the members who have heard the case,
including those who first heard it. The President
or the other members, as the case may be, shall
give opinion on the point or points so referred
within a period of 1 month from the date of such
reference.
4) A complaint shall be instituted in a State
Commission within the limits of whose
jurisdiction,
a. the opposite party or each of the opposite
parties, where there are more than 1, at the time
of the institution of the complaint, ordinarily
resides or carries on business or has a branch
office or personally works for gain; OR
b. any of the opposite parties, where there are
more than one, at the time of the institution of the
complaint, actually and voluntarily resides, or
carries on business or has a branch office or
personally works for gain, provided in such case,
the permission of the State Commission is given;
or
c. the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises; or
d. the complainant resides or personally works
for gain.
Procedure applicable to State Commission (Sec
49)
The provisions relating to complaints shall, with
such modifications as may be necessary, be
applicable to the disposal of complaints by the
State Commission.
The State Commission may also declare any
terms of contract, which is unfair to any
consumer, to be null and void.
Review by State Commission in Certain Case
Section 50 empowers the State Commission to
review any of the order passed by it if there is an
error apparent on the face of the record, either of
its own motion or on an application made by any
of the parties within thirty days of such order.
Appeal to National Commission (Sec 51)
1. Any person aggrieved by an order made by
the State Commission may prefer an appeal
against such order to the National Commission
within 30 days from the date of the order in
prescribed form and manner. National
Commission shall not entertain the appeal after
the expiry of 30 days unless it is satisfied that
there was sufficient cause for not filing it within
that period . Provided further that no appeal by a
person, who is required to pay any amount in
terms of an order of the State Commission, shall
be entertained by the National Commission
unless the appellant has deposited 50% of that
amount in the manner as may be prescribed.
2) Save as otherwise expressly provided under
this Act or by any other law for the time being in
force, an appeal shall lie to the National
Commission from any order passed in appeal by
any State Commission, if the National
Commission is satisfied that the case involves a
substantial question of law.
3) In an appeal involving a question of law, the
memorandum of appeal shall precisely state the
substantial question of law involved in the
appeal.
4) Where the National Commission is satisfied
that a substantial question of law is involved in
any case, it shall formulate that question and
hear the appeal on that question.

Further, nothing in this sub-section shall be
deemed to take away or abridge the power of the
National Commission to hear, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, the appeal on any other
substantial question of law, if it is satisfied that
the case involves such question of law.
An appeal may lie to the National Commission
from an order passed ex-parte by the State
Commission.
Hearing of appeal by State Commission or
National Commission (Sec 52) An appeal filed
before the State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be, shall be heard
as expeditiously as possible and every
endeavour shall be made to dispose of the
appeal within 90 days from the date of its
admission.
Adjournment shall not ordinarily be granted by
the State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be, unless
sufficient cause is shown and the reasons for
grant of adjournment have been recorded in
writing by such Commission. State Commission
or the National Commission, as the case may
be, shall make such orders as to the costs
occasioned by the adjournment, as may be
specified by regulations .
In the event of an appeal being disposed of after
the period so specified, the State Commission or
the National Commission, as the case may be,
shall record in writing the reasons for the same
at the time of disposing of the said appeal.
National Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission (Sec 53)
The CG to establish a National Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission, to be known
as the National Commission. The National
Commission shall ordinarily function at the
National Capital Region and perform its
functions at such other places as the CG may in
consultation with the National Commission notify
in the Official Gazette. CG may also establish
regional Benches of the National Commission, at
such places, as it deems fit.

Composition of National Commission (Sec 54)
The National Commission shall consist of
a. a President; and
b. not less than 4 and not more than prescribed.
Qualifications, etc., of President and members of
National Commission (Sec 55)
The CG may, by notification, make rules to
provide for qualifications, appointment, term of
office, salaries and allowances, resignation,
removal and other terms and conditions of
service of the President and members of the
National Commission.
President and members of the National
Commission shall hold office for such term as
specified in the rules made by the CG but not
exceeding 5 years from the date on which he
enters upon his office and shall be eligible for
reappointment.
It may be noted that no President or members
shall hold office as such after he has attained
such age as specified in the rules made by the
CG which shall not exceed, a. in the case of the
President, the age of 70 years;
b. in the case of any other member, the age of
67 years. Jurisdiction of National Commission
(Sec 58)
The National Commission shall have jurisdiction
(a) To entertain
i. Complaints where the value of the goods or
services paid as consideration exceeds Rs. 10
Cr. Further, where the CG deems it necessary
so to do, it may prescribe such other value, as it
deems fit.
ii. Complaints against unfair contracts, where the
value of goods or services paid as consideration
exceeds Rs. 10 Cr.;
iii. Appeals against the orders of any State
Commission;
iv. Appeals against the orders of the Central
Authority; and
(b) to call for the records and pass appropriate
orders in any consumer dispute which is pending
before or has been decided by any State
Commission where it appears to the National
Commission that such State Commission has
exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or
has failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or
has acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction
illegally or with material irregularity.
2) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the
National Commission may be exercised by
Benches thereof and a Bench may be
constituted by the President with one or more
members as he may deem fit. The senior-most
member of the Bench shall preside over the
Bench.
3) Where the members of a Bench differ in
opinion on any point, the points shall be decided
according to the opinion of the majority, if there
is a majority, but if the members are equally
divided, they shall state the point or points on
which they differ, and make a reference to the
President who shall either hear the point or
points himself or refer the case for hearing on
such point or points by one or more of the other
members and such point or points shall be
decided according to the opinion of the majority
of the members who have heard the case,
including those who first heard it. The President
or the other member, as the case may be, shall
give opinion on the point or points so referred
within 2 months from the date of such reference.
Procedure Applicable to National Commission
(Sec 59)
The provisions relating to complaints u/s 35, 36,
37, 38 & 39 shall, with such modifications as
may be considered necessary, be applicable to
the disposal of complaints by the National
Commission.
National Commission may also declare any
terms of contract, which is unfair to any
consumer to be null and void.
Review by National Commission in Certain
Cases (Sec 60)
The National Commission can review any of the
order passed by it if there is an error apparent on
the face of the record, either of its own motion or
on an application made by any of the parties
within 30 days of such order.
Power to set aside ex parte Orders
Where an order is passed by the National
Commission ex parte, the aggrieved party may
make an application to the Commission for
setting aside such order.
Procedures for Service of Notice (Sec 65)
1) All notices shall be served by delivering or
transmitting a copy thereof by registered post
acknowledgment due addressed to opposite
party against whom complaint is made or to the
complainant by speed post or by such courier
service, approved by Commission or by any
other mode of transmission of documents
including electronic means.
2) The notice may be served on an electronic
service provider at the address provided by it on
the electronic platform from where it provides its
services as such and for this purpose, the
electronic service provider shall designate a
nodal officer to accept and process such notices.
3) When an acknowledgment or any other
receipt purporting to be signed by the opposite
party or his agent or, as the case may be, by the
complainant is received by the District
Commission, the State Commission or the
National Commission, as the case may be, or
postal article containing the notice is received
back by such District Commission, State
Commission or the National Commission, with
an endorsement purporting to have been made
by a postal employee or by any person
authorised by the courier service to the effect
that the opposite party or his agent or
complainant had refused to take delivery of the
postal article containing the notice or had refused
to accept the notice by any other means when
tendered or transmitted to him, the District
Commission or the State Commission or the
National Commission, as the case may be, shall
declare that the notice has been duly served on
the opposite party or to the complainant, as the
case may be:
Provided that where the notice was properly
addressed, pre-paid and duly sent by registered
post acknowledgment due, a declaration referred
to in this sub-section shall be made
notwithstanding the fact that the
acknowledgment has been lost or misplaced, or
for any other reason, has not been received by
the District Commission, the State Commission
or the National Commission, as the case may
be, within 30 days from the date of issue of
notice.
4) All notices required to be served on an
opposite party or to complainant, as the case
may be, shall be deemed to be sufficiently
served, if addressed in the case of the opposite
party, to the place where business or profession
is carried on, and in case of the complainant, the
place where such person actually and voluntarily
resides.
Experts to Assist National Commission or State
Commission (Sec 66)
Where the National Commission or the State
Commission, as the case may be, on an
application by a complainant or otherwise, is of
the opinion that it involves the larger interest of
consumers, it may direct any individual or
organisation or expert to assist the Commission.
Appeal against Order of National Commission
(Sec 67)
Any person, aggrieved by an order made by the
National Commission may prefer an appeal
against such order to the Supreme Court within
30 days from the date of the order.
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain
an appeal after the expiry of 30 days if it is
satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not
filing it within that period.
Provided further that no appeal by a person who
is required to pay any amount in terms of an
order of the National Commission shall be
entertained by the Supreme Court unless that
person has deposited 50% of that amount in the
manner as may be prescribed.
Finality of Orders (Sec 68)
Every order of a Commission shall, if no appeal
has been preferred against such order, be final.
Limitation Period (Sec 69)
The District Commission, the State Commission
or the National Commission shall not admit a
complaint unless it is filed within 2 years from the
date on which the cause of action has arisen.
A complaint may be entertained after 2 years, if
the complainant satisfies that he had sufficient
cause for not filing the complaint within such
period:
A complaint shall not be entertained unless
Commission records its reasons for condoning
such delay.
Enforcement of Orders of District Commission,
State Commission and National Commission
(Sec 71)
Every order made by a District Commission,
State Commission or the National
Commission shall be enforced by it in the same
manner as if it were a decree made by a
Court in a suit before it and the provisions of
Order XXI of the 1st Schedule to the CPC, 1908
shall, as far as may be, applicable, subject to the
modification that every reference therein to the
decree shall be construed as reference to the
order made under the Act.
Penalty for Noncompliance of Order (Sec 72)
1) Whoever fails to comply with any order made
by the District Commission or the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than one month, but which may extend to 3
years, or with fine, which shall not be less than
Rs. 25,000, but which may extend to Rs. 1 Lakh,
or with both.
2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Cr
PC, 1973, the District Commission, the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be, shall have the power of a Judicial
Magistrate of 1st Class for the trial of offences
and on conferment of such powers, the District
Commission or the State Commission or the
National Commission, as the case may be, shall
be deemed to be a JMFC for the purposes of the
Cr PC, 1973.
3) Save as otherwise provided, the above
offences shall be tried summarily by the District
Commission or the State Commission or the
National Commission, as the case may be.
Appeal against Order Passed u/s 72 (Sec 73)
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Cr.
PC, 1973, where an order is passed u/s 72
(1), an appeal shall lie, both on facts and on law
from
a. the order made by the District Commission to
the State Commission;
b. the order made by the State Commission to
the National Commission; and
c. the order made by the National Commission
to the Supreme Court.
Every appeal shall be preferred within 30 days
from the date of order of a District Commission
or a State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be.
It may be noted that the State Commission or the
National Commission or the Supreme Court, as
the case may be, may entertain an appeal after
the expiry of 30 days, if it is satisfied that the
appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring
the appeal within the said period.
Appeal shall not lie before any court, from any
order of a District Commission or a State
Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be.
MEDIATION
Establishment of Consumer Mediation Cell (Sec
74)
The State Government can establish a consumer
mediation cell to be attached to each of the
District Commissions and the State
Commissions of that State. Further the CG also
empowers to establish a consumer mediation
cell to be attached to the National Commission
and each of the regional Benches.
A consumer mediation cell shall consist of such
persons as may be prescribed.

Every consumer mediation cell shall maintain a.
a list of empanelled mediators;
b. a list of cases handled by the cell;
c. record of proceeding; and
d. any other information as may be specified by
regulations.
Every consumer mediation cell shall submit a
quarterly report to the District Commission, State
Commission or the National Commission to
which it is attached, in the manner specified by
regulations.
Empanelment of Mediators (Sec 75)
1) For the purpose of mediation, the National
Commission or the State Commission or the
District Commission, as the case may be, shall
prepare a panel of the mediators to be
maintained by the consumer mediation cell
attached to it, on the recommendation of a
selection committee consisting of the President
and a member of that Commission.
The qualifications and experience required for
empanelment as mediator, the procedure for
empanelment, the manner of training
empanelled mediators, the fee payable to
empanelled mediator, the terms and conditions
for empanelment, the code of conduct for
empanelled mediators, the grounds on which,
and the manner in which, empanelled mediators
shall be removed or empanelment shall be
cancelled and other matters relating thereto,
shall be such as may be specified by
regulations.
The panel of mediators shall be valid for a period
of five years, and the empanelled mediators shall
be eligible to be considered for re -empanelment
for another term, subject to such conditions as
may be specified by regulations.
Nomination of Mediators from Panel (Sec 76)
The District Commission, the State Commission
or the National Commission shall, while
nominating any person from the panel of
mediators referred to in section 75, consider his
suitability for resolving the consumer dispute
involved.
Duty of Mediator to Disclose Certain Fact (Sec
77)
It shall be the duty of the mediator to disclose
a. any personal, professional or financial interest
in the outcome of the consumer dispute;
b. the circumstances which may give rise to a
justifiable doubt as to his independence or
impartiality; and
c. such other facts as may be specified by
regulations.
Replacement of Mediator in Certain Cases (Sec
78)
Where the District Commission or the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be, is satisfied, on the information
furnished by the mediator or on the information
received from any other person including parties
to the complaint and after hearing the mediator,
it shall replace such mediator by another
mediator.
Procedure for Mediation (Sec 79)
The mediation shall be held in the consumer
mediation cell attached to the District
Commission, the State Commission or the
National Commission, as the case may be.
Where a consumer dispute is referred for
mediation by the District Commission or the
State Commission or the National Commission,
as the case may be, the mediator nominated by
such Commission shall have regard to the rights
and obligations of the parties, the usages of
trade, if any, the circumstances giving rise to the
consumer dispute and such other relevant
factors, as he may deem necessary and shall be
guided by the principles of natural justice while
carrying out mediation.
The mediator so nominated shall conduct
mediation within such time and in such manner
as may be specified by regulations.
Settlement through Mediation (Sec 80)
1) Pursuant to mediation, if an agreement is
reached between the parties with respect to all
of the issues involved in the consumer dispute or
with respect to only some of the issues, the
terms of such agreement shall be reduced to
writing accordingly, and signed by the parties to
such dispute or their authorised representatives.
2) The mediator shall prepare a settlement report
of the settlement and forward the signed
agreement along with such report to the
concerned Commission.
Where no agreement is reached between the
parties within the specified time or the mediator
is of the opinion that settlement is not possible,
he shall prepare his report accordingly and
submit the same to the concerned Commission.
Recording Settlement and Passing of Order (Sec
81)
1) The District Commission or the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be, shall, within 7 days of the receipt
of the settlement report, pass suitable order
recording such settlement of consumer dispute
and dispose of the matter accordingly.
2) Where the consumer dispute is settled only in
part, the District Commission or the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be, shall record settlement of the
issues which have been so settled and continue
to hear other issues involved in such consumer
dispute.
Where the consumer dispute could not be settled
by mediation, the District Commission or the
State Commission or the National Commission,
as the case may be, shall continue to hear all the
issues involved in such consumer dispute.
PRODUCT LIABILITY (Sec 82)
According to section 82 Chapter VI shall apply to
every claim for compensation under a product
liability action by a complainant for any harm
caused by a defective product manufactured by
a product manufacturer or serviced by a product
service provider or sold by a product seller.

Product Liability Action (Sec 83)
A product liability action may be brought by a
complainant against a product manufacturer or a
product service provider or a product seller, as
the case may be, for any harm caused to him on
account of a defective product.

Liability of Product Manufacturer (Sec 84)
A product manufacturer shall be liable in a
product liability action, if a. the product contains
a manufacturing defect; or
b. the product is defective in design; or
c. there is a deviation from manufacturing
specifications; or
d. the product does not conform to the express
warranty; or
e. the product fails to contain adequate
instructions of correct usage to prevent any harm
or any warning regarding improper or incorrect
usage.
A product manufacturer shall be liable in a
product liability action even if he proves that he
was not negligent or fraudulent in making the
express warranty of a product.
Liability of Product Service Provider (Sec 85)
A product service provider shall be liable in a
product liability action, if
a. the service provided by him was faulty or
imperfect or deficient or inadequate in quality,
nature or manner of performance which is
required to be provided by or under any law for
the time being in force, or pursuant to any
contract or otherwise; or
b. there was an act of omission or commission or
negligence or conscious withholding any
information which caused harm; or
c. the service provider did not issue adequate
instructions or warnings to prevent any harm; or
d. the service did not conform to express
warranty or the terms and conditions of the
contract.
Liability of Product Sellers (Sec 86)
A product seller who is not a product
manufacturer shall be liable in a product liability
action, if
a. he has exercised substantial control over the
designing, testing, manufacturing, packaging or
labelling of a product that caused harm; or
b. he has altered or modified the product and
such alteration or modification was the
substantial factor in causing the harm; or
c. he has made an express warranty of a
product independent of any express warranty
made by a manufacturer and such product failed
to conform to the express warranty made by the
product seller which caused the harm; or
d. the product has been sold by him and the
identity of product manufacturer of such product
is not known, or if known, the service of notice or
process or warrant cannot be effected on him or
he is not subject to the law which is in force in
India or the order, if any, passed or to be passed
cannot be enforced against him; or
e. he failed to exercise reasonable care in
assembling, inspecting or maintaining such
product or he did not pass on the warnings or
instructions of the product manufacturer
regarding the dangers involved or proper usage
of the product while selling such product and
such failure was the proximate cause of the
harm
Exceptions to Product Liability Action (Sec 87)
A product liability action cannot be brought
against the product seller if, at the time of harm,
the product was misused, altered, or modified.
In any product liability action based on the failure
to provide adequate warnings or instructions, the
product manufacturer shall not be liable, if
a. the product was purchased by an employer for
use at the workplace and the product
manufacturer had provided warnings or
instructions to such employer;
b. the product was sold as a component or
material to be used in another product and
necessary warnings or instructions were given
by the product manufacturer to the purchaser of
such component or material, but the harm was
caused to the complainant by use of the end
product in which such component or material
was used;
c. the product was one which was legally meant
to be used or dispensed only by or under the
supervision of an expert or a class of experts
and the product manufacturer had employed
reasonable means to give the warnings or
instructions for usage of such product to such
expert or class of experts; or
d. the complainant, while using such product,
was under the influence of alcohol or any
prescription drug which had not been prescribed
by a medical practitioner .
A product manufacturer shall not be liable for
failure to instruct or warn about a danger which
is obvious or commonly known to the user or
consumer of such product or which, such user or
consumer, ought to have known, taking into
account the characteristics of such product.
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
Penalty for Noncompliance of Direction of
Central Authority (Sec 88)
Whoever, fails to comply with any direction of
the Central Authority, shall be punished with
imprisonment up to 6 months OR with fine up-to
Rs. 25 Lakh, or with both.
Punishment for False or Misleading
Advertisement (Sec 89)
Any manufacturer or service provider who
causes a false or misleading advertisement to be
made which is prejudicial to the interest of
consumers shall be punished with imprisonment
up to 2 years AND with fine up-to Rs. 10 lakh;
and for every subsequent offence, be punished
with imprisonment up to 5 years and with fine up
to Rs. 50 Lakh.
Cognizance of Offence by Court (Sec 92)
No cognizance shall be taken by a competent
court of any offence u/s 88 and 89 except on a
complaint filed by the Central Authority or any
officer authorised by it in this behalf.

Compounding of Offences (Sec 96)
1) Any offence punishable u/s 88 and 89, may,
either before or after the institution of the
prosecution, be compounded, on payment of
prescribed amount.
However, no compounding of such offence shall
be made without the leave of the court before
which a complaint has been filed u/s 92.
Further, such sum shall not, in any case, exceed
the maximum amount of the fine, which may be
imposed for the offence so compounded.
2) the Central Authority or any officer as may be
specially authorised by him in this behalf, may
compound offences.
3) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to
person who commits the same or similar offence,
within a period of 3 years from the date on which
the first offence, committed by him, was
compounded.
Any 2nd or subsequent offence committed after
the expiry of a period of 3 years from the date on
which the offence was previously compounded,
shall be deemed to be a 1st offence.

4) Where an offence has been compounded, no
proceeding or further proceeding, as the case
may be, shall be taken against the offender in
respect of the offence so compounded.
5) The acceptance of the sum of money for
compounding an offence by the Central Authority
or an officer of the Central Authority empowered
in this behalf shall be deemed to amount to an
acquittal within the meaning of the Cr PC, 1973.
Punishment for Manufacturing for Sale or
Storing, Selling or Distributing or Importing
Products Containing Adulterant
1) Whoever, by himself or by any other person
on his behalf, manufactures for sale or stores or
sells or distributes or imports any product
containing an adulterant shall be punished, if
such act
a. does not result in any injury to the consumer,
with imprisonment up to 6 months
AND with fine up to Rs. 1 lakh;
b. causing injury not amounting to grievous hurt
to the consumer, with imprisonment up-to 1 year
AND with fine up-to Rs. 3 lakh;
c. causing injury resulting in grievous hurt to the
consumer, with imprisonment up to
7 years AND with fine up-to Rs. 5 lakh; and
d. results in the death of a consumer, with
imprisonment at least 7 years, but up to life AND
with fine minimum Rs. 10 Lakh.
2) The offences under clauses (c) and (d) shall
be cognizable and non-bailable.
The court may, in case of 1st conviction,
suspend any licence issued to the person
referred to in that sub -section, under any law for
the time being in force, for a period up to 2
years, and in case of 2nd or subsequent
conviction, cancel the licence.
Here
(a) "Adulterant" means any material including
extraneous matter which is employed or used for
making a product unsafe;
(b) "Grievous hurt" shall have the same meaning
as assigned to it in section 320 of the IPC.
Punishment for Manufacturing for Sale or for
Storing or Selling or Distributing or Importing
Spurious Goods
1) Whoever, by himself or by any other person
on his behalf, manufactures for sale or stores or
sells or distributes or imp orts any spurious
goods shall be punished, if such act
a. causing injury not amounting to grievous hurt
to the consumer, with imprisonment up to 1 year
and with fine up to Rs. 3 Lakh;
b. causing injury resulting in grievous hurt to the
consumer, with imprisonment up-to
7 years and with fine up to Rs. 5 Lakhs;
c. results in the death of a consumer, with
imprisonment for at least 7 years, but may be up
to life and with fine at least Rs. 10 lakh.
2) The offences under clauses (b) & (c) shall be
cognizable and non-bailable.
The court may, in case of 1st conviction,
suspend any licence issued to the concerned
person, under any law for the time being in force,
for a period up to 2 years, and in case of 2nd or
subsequent conviction, cancel the licence.
Measures to Prevent Unfair Trade Practices in
E-Commerce, Direct Selling (Sec 94) The CG
can take such measures in the prescribed
manner for the purposes of preventing unfair
trade practices in e-commerce, direct selling and
also to protect the interest and rights of
consumers.

Protection of Action Taken in Good Faith (Sec
98)
No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding
shall lie against the Presidents and members of
the District Commission, the State Commission
and the National Commission, the Chief
Commissioner, the Commissioner, any officer or
employee and other person performing any duty
under this Act, for any act which is in good faith
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this
Act or under any rule or order made thereunder.

Act not in derogation of any other law (Sec 100)
The provisions of Consumer Protection Act,
2019 shall be in addition to and not in derogation
of the provisions of any other law for the time
being in force.

Legal Metrology Act, 2009

Introduction
Legal metrology can be defined as that part of
metrology which deals with units of
measurement, methods of measurement and
measuring instruments in so far as they concern
statutory, technical and legal requirements which
have the ultimate object of assuring public
guarantee from the point of view of security and
of appropriate accuracy of measurements.
Definitions
Dealer
According to section 2(b) Dealer in relation to
any weight or measure, means a person who,
carries on, directly or otherwise, the business of
buying, selling, supplying or distributing any such
weight or measure, whether for cash or for
deferred payment or for commission,
remuneration or other valuable consideration
Manufacture
As per section 2(i) "manufacturer" in relation to
any weight or measure, means a person who
i. manufactures weight or measure,
ii. manufactures ,aquires or Assembles parts and
claims the end product to be a weight or
measure manufactured by himself
iii. puts, or causes to be put, his own mark on
any complete weight or measure made or
manufactured by others.
Pre-packed commodity
Section 2 (l) define "pre-packaged commodity"
as to mean a commodity which without the
purchaser being present is placed in a package
of whatever nature, whether sealed or not, so
that the product contained therein has a pre-
determined quantity
International Organisation of Legal Metrology
(OIML)
The International Organization of Legal
Metrology (OIML) is an intergovernmental treaty
organization whose membership includes
Member States, countries. It was established in
1955 in order to promote the global
harmonization of legal metrology procedures
The OIML develops model regulations,
International Recommendations, which provide
Members with an internationally agreed-upon
basis for the establishment of national legislation
on various categories of measuring instruments.
OIML Certificate System for Measuring
Instruments
The OIML Certificate System for Measuring
Instruments was introduced in 1991 to facilitate
administrative procedures
The System provides the possibility for a
manufacturer to obtain an OIML Certificate and a
Test Report indicating that a given instrument
type (pattern) complies with the requirements of
the relevant OIML International
Recommendations

.1
Standard Weights and Measures
Section 4 of the Act provides that every unit of
weight or measure shall be in accordance with
the metric system based on the international
system of units.
Section 5 of the Act provides that the
a) Base unit of length shall be the metre;
b) mass shall be the kilogram; time shall be the
second;
c) electric current shall be the ampere;
d) thermodynamic temperature shall be the
kelvin;
e) luminous intensity shall be the candela;
f) and amount of substance shall be the mole.
Section 6 states that the base unit of numeration
shall be the unit of the international form of
Indian numeral. Every numeration shall be made
in accordance with the decimal system.
Section 7 of the Act states
a) the base units of weights and measures
specified in section 5 shall be the standard units
of weights and measures.
b) The base unit of numeration specified in
section 6 shall be the standard unit of
numeration.
c) For the purpose of deriving the value of base,
derived and other units mentioned in section 5,
the Central Government shall prepare or cause
to be prepared objects or equipments
d) The physical characteristics, configuration,
constructional details, materials, equipments,
performance, tolerances, period of re-
verification, methods or procedures of tests shall
be such as may be prescribed.
Section 8
a) No weight, measure or numeral, other than the
standard weight, measure or numeral, shall be
used as a standard weight, measure or numeral.
b) No weight or measure, shall be manufactured
or imported unless it conforms to the standards
of weight or measure specified under section 8.
Note: However, the aforesaid provisions shall
not apply for manufacture done exclusively for
export or for the purpose of any scientific
investigation or research.
Section 11
a) Provides that no person shall, in relation to
any goods, things or service, quote, or make
announcement of, whether by word of mouth or
otherwise, any price or charge, or issue or exhibit
any price list, invoice, cash memo or other
document,
b) Or prepare or publish any advertisement,
poster or other document, or indicate the net
quantity of a pre-packaged commodity, or
express in relation to any transaction or
protection, any quantity or dimension, otherwise
than in accordance with the standard unit of
weight, measure or numeration.
Appointment and Power of Director, Controller
and legal
metrology officers
.2
Section 13 of the Act empowers the Central
Government to appoint (by Notification) a
Director of legal metrology, Additional Director,
Joint Director, Deputy Director, Assistant
Director
Section 14 of the Act, provides that the State
Government may, by notification, appoint a
Controller of legal metrology, Additional
Controller, Joint Controller, Deputy Controller,
Assistant Controller, Inspector
Section 15 of the Act confer powers of
inspection on the Director, Controller or any legal
metrology officer may, if he has any reason to
believe, that any weight or measure or other
goods in relation to which any trade and
commerce has taken place or is intended to take
place and in respect of which an offence
punishable under this Act appears to have been,
or is likely to be, committed are either kept or
concealed in any premises or are in the course
of transportation.
Forfeiture
Every non-standard or unverified weight or
measure, and every package used in the course
of, or in relation to, any trade and commerce and
seized under section 15, shall be liable to be
forfeited to the State Government. Unless the
same is verified and stamped within such time as
may be prescribed.
Manufacturers etc. to maintain records and
registers
Section 17 of the Act provides that every
manufacturer, repairer or dealer of weight or
measure shall maintain such records and
registers as may be prescribed. The records and
registers maintained shall be produced at the
time of inspection to the persons authorised for
the purpose of Inspection.
Declarations on pre-packaged commodities
Section 18 states that no person shall
manufacture, pack, sell, import, distribute,
deliver, offer, expose or possess for sale any
pre-packaged commodity unless such package
is in such standard quantities or number and
bears thereon such declarations and particulars
in such manner as may be prescribed.
Any advertisement mentioning the retail sale
price of a pre-packaged commodity shall contain
a declaration as to the net quantity or number of
the commodity contained in the package in such
form and manner as may be prescribed.
Registration for importer of weight or measure
Section 19 provides that no person shall import
any weight or measure unless he is registered
with the Director in such manner and on
payment of such fees, as may be prescribed.
Section 20 No weight or measure, whether singly
or as a part or component of any machine shall
be imported unless it conforms to the standards
of weight or measure established by or under this
Act.
Prohibition of manufacture, repair or sale og
weight or
measure without licence
.3
Section 23 no person shall manufacture, repair
or sell, or offer, expose or possess for repair or
sale, any weight or measure unless he holds a
licence issued by the Controller. Section 24
Every person possessing using or intending to
use any weight or measure, shall, before putting
such weight or measure into such use, have
such weight or measure verified.
Offences and Penalties
Section 25 penalty for use of non-standard
Weight or measure may be twenty-five thousand
rupees and for the second or subsequent
offence, with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months and also with fine.
Penalty for counterfeiting of seals
Section 44 provides that whoever counterfeits
any seal, sells, or disposes counterfeit seal, or
possesses any counterfeit seal, or counterfeits or
removes or tampers with any stamp, or affixes
the stamp so removed on, or inserts the same
into, any other weight or measure, shall be
punished

.4


Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act,
                                         2016

Introduction
Real estate sector plays a catalytic role in
fulfilling the needs and demand for housing and
infrastructure in the country and is an important
pillar of the economy. While this sector has
grown significantly in recent years, it has been
largely unregulated, with absence of
professionalism and standardisation and lack of
adequate consumer protection. It has no sectoral
regulator like there are for other specific sectors
like insurance, telecom, stock markets etc.
Parliament enacted the Real Estate (Regulation
and Development) Act, 2016 which aims at
protecting the rights and interests of consumers
and promotion of uniformity and standardization
of business practices and transactions in the real
estate sector.
Salient Features of the act:
I. Establish the Real Estate Regulatory Authority
for regulation and promotion of the real estate
sector
II. Ensure sale of plot, apartment of building, as
the case may be, or sale of real estate project, in
an efficient and transparent manner
III. Ensure protect the interest of consumers in
the real estate sector
IV. Establish an adjudicating mechanism for
speedy dispute redressal and also to establish
the Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals from the
decisions, directions or orders of the RERA
V. Regulates transactions between buyers and
promoters of residential real estate projects
VI. Establishes state level regulatory authorities
called RERAs
VII. Residential real estate projects, with some
exceptions, need to be registered with RERAs
VIII. Promoters cannot book or offer these
projects for sale without registering them. Real
estate agents dealing in these projects also need
to register with RERAs
IX. Registration, the promoter must upload
details of the project on the website of the
RERA. These include the site and layout plan,
and schedule for completion of the real estate
project
X. Amount collected from buyers for a project
must be maintained in a separate bank account
and must only be used for construction of that
project. The state government can alter this
amount
XI. Right to Legal Representation on behalf of
client by CS/CA/CMA or legal
practitioners
XII. Imposes stringent penalty on promoter, real
estate agent and also prescribes imprisonment.

iii. a company;
iv. a partnership firm or LLP, as the case may be;
v. a competent authority;
vi. an AOP or a BOI whether incorporated or not;
vii. a co-operative society registered under co-
operative societies law;
viii. other notified entity;
3. "Planning area" means a planning area or a
development area or a local planning area or a
regional development plan area, by whatever
name called, or any other area specified as such
by the appropriate Government or any
competent authority and includes any area
designated by the appropriate Government or
the competent authority to be a planning area for
future planned development, under the law
relating to Town and Country Planning for the
time being in force and as revised from time to
time;
4. "Promoter" means,
i. a person who constructs or causes to be
constructed an independent building or a
building consisting of apartments, or converts an
existing building or a part thereof into
apartments, for the purpose of selling all or some
of the apartments to other persons and includes
his assignees; or
ii. a person who develops land into a project,
whether or not the person also constructs
structures on any of the plots, for the purpose of
selling to other persons all or some of the plots in
the said project, whether with or without
structures thereon; or
iii. any                                            development authority   or   any   other   public   body   in   respectof
allottees of
a) buildings or apartments, as the case may be,
constructed by such authority or body on lands
owned by them or placed at their disposal by the
Government; or
b) plots owned by such authority or body or
placed at their disposal by the Government, for
the purpose of selling all or some of the
apartments or plots; or
iv. an apex State level co-operative housing
finance society and a primary cooperative
housing society which constructs apartments or
buildings for its members or in respect of the
allottees of such apartments or buildings; or
v. any other person who acts himself as a
builder, coloniser, contractor, developer, estate
developer or by any other name or claims to be
acting as the holder of a power of attorney from
the owner of the land on which the building or
apartment is constructed or plot is developed for
sale; or
vi. such other person who constructs any
building or apartment for sale to the general
public.
Explanation. where the person who constructs or
converts a building into apartments or develops a
plot for sale and the persons who sells
apartments or plots are different persons, both of
them shall be deemed to be the promoters and
shall be jointly liable as such for the functions
and responsibilities specified, under this Act or
the rules and regulations made there under;
5. "Real estate agent" means any person, who
negotiates or acts on behalf of one person in a
transaction of transfer of his plot, apartment or
building, as the case may be, in a real estate
project, by way of sale, with another person or
transfer of plot, apartment or building, as the
case may be, of any other person to him and
receives remuneration or fees or any other
charges for his services whether as commission
or otherwise and includes a person who
introduces, through any medium, prospective
buyers and sellers to each other for negotiation
for sale or purchase of plot, apartment or
building, as the case may be, and includes
property dealers, brokers, middlemen by
whatever name called;
6. (Sec 2 (g))
For the Union territory without Legislature, the
Central Government; for the Union territory of
Puducherry, the Union territory Government; for
the Union territory of Delhi, the Central Ministry
of Urban Development; for the State, the State
Government.
Responsibilities of the appropriate Government
a) To notify Rules for the implementation of the
Act, within 6 months of its commencement.
b) To establish the Regulatory Authority within 1
year from its commencement i.e. maximum by
30th April, 2017.
c) To designate an officer (preferably Housing
Secretary) as interim Regulatory Authority, until
the establishment of a full time Regulatory
Authority.
d) To establish the Appellate Tribunal within 1
year from its commencement i.e. maximum by
30th April, 2017.
e) To designate an existing Appellate Tribunal
(under any other law in force) to be the Appellate
Tribunal, until the establishment of a full time
Appellate Tribunal.
f) The Chairperson and Members of the
Regulatory Authority and the Members of the
Appellate Tribunal are required to be appointed
based on recommendations of a Selection
Committee, thus the appropriate Government is
required to constitute the Selection Committee.
g) To appoint officers and other employees of
Regulatory Authority and the Appellate Tribunal.
h) To identify office space etc. and other
infrastructure for its functioning.
i) T
j) The Central Government (i.e. the Ministry of
HUPA) is required to establish the Central
Advisory Council.
Projects exempt from the ambit of the Act
The following projects do not require to be
registered under the Act:
Area of land does not exceed 500 Sq. Meters
No. of apartments does not exceed 8
In case of Renovation/ Repair/Re-development
a) where the area of land proposed to be
developed does not exceed 500 square meters
or the number of apartments proposed to be
developed does not exceed 8, inclusive of all
phases;
b) where the promoter has received completion
certificate for a real estate project prior to
commencement of this Act;
For the purpose of renovation or repair or re-
development which does not involve marketing,
advertising selling or new allotment of any
apartment, plot or building, as the case may be,
under the real estate project.
Application for Registration of real estate
projects
Every promoter shall make an application to the
Authority for registration of the real estate project
in such form, manner, within such time and
accompanied by such fee as may be specified
by the regulations made by the Authority.

Granting of Registration by the Authority
On receipt of the application, the Authority shall
within 30 days-
a) Grant registration subject to the provisions of
the Act and the rules and regulations made
thereunder. A registration number, including a
Login Id and password to the applicant for
accessing the website of the Authority and to
create his web page and to fill therein the details
of the proposed project; or
b) Reject the application for reasons to be
recorded in writing, if such application does not
conform to the provisions of this Act or the rules
or regulations made thereunder. Application shall
not be rejected unless the applicant has been
given an opportunity of being heard in the
matter.
If the Authority fails to grant the registration or
reject the application, as the case may be, the
project shall be deemed to have been registered,
and the Authority shall within 7 days of the expiry
of the said period of 30 days specified.
The registration granted shall be valid for a
period declared by the promoter for completion
of the project or phase thereof, as the case may
be.
Extension of registration
Delay in handing over of projects by the
developer within the stipulated time frame has
been a major woe (problem) of the buyers and
hence has been a major trigger for promulgation
of this Act. Hence, at the time of registration, a
developer has to specify a time line during which
he will complete and handover the project to the
buyer.
The timeline is very sacrosanct (important)
because if he fails to do so within the stated
time, then there are rigorous provisions in the
Act as prescribed in section 7 & 8 whereby his
registration would be revoked and his project
would be usurped by the Regulator.
Though as per section 6, an extension of
registration may be granted at the sole discretion
of the regulator due to Force Majeure conditions
or if there are reasonable circumstances which
merit extension.
The registration granted may be extended by the
Authority on an application made by the
promoter due to force majeure, in such form and
on payment of such fee as may be specified by
regulations made by the Authority.
Force majeure" shall mean a case of war, flood,
drought, fire, cyclone, earthquake or any other
calamity caused by nature affecting the regular
development of the real estate project.
Revocation of registration
The Authority may, on receipt of a complaint or
suo-moto in this behalf or on the
recommendation of the competent authority,
revoke the registration granted, after being
satisfied that
a) the promoter makes default in doing anything
required by or under this Act or the rules or the
regulations made there under;
b) the promoter violates any of the terms or
conditions of the approval given by the
competent authority;
c) the promoter is involved in any kind of unfair
practice or irregularities.
The registration granted to the promoter shall not
be revoked unless the Authority has given to the
promoter not less than 30 , in writing, stating the
grounds on which it is proposed to revoke the
registration, and has considered any cause
shown by the promoter within the period of that
notice against the proposed revocation.
The Authority, upon the revocation of the
registration-
Debar the promoter from accessing its website in
relation to that project and specify his name in
the list of defaulters and display his photograph
on its website and also inform the other Real
Estate Regulatory Authority in other States and
Union territories about such revocation or
registration;
Facilitate the remaining development works to
be carried out in accordance with the provisions
of section 8;
Direct the bank holding the project back account
to freeze the account, and thereafter take such
further necessary actions, including consequent
de-freezing of the said account, towards
facilitating the remaining development works in
accordance with the provisions of section 8;
To protect the interest of allottees or in the public
interest, issue such directions as it may deem
necessary.
Obligation of Authority consequent upon lapse of
or on revocation of registration (Section 8)
Upon lapse of the registration or on revocation of
the registration under the Act, the authority, may
consult the appropriate Government to take such
action as it may deem fit including the carrying
out of the remaining development works by
competent authority or by the association of
allottees or in any other manner, as may be
determined by the Authority.
The direction, decision or order of the Authority
shall not take effect until the expiry of the period
of appeal provided under the provisions of the
Act:
In case of revocation of registration of a project
under the Act, the association of allottees shall
have the first right of refusal for carrying out of
the remaining development works.
Registration of Real Estate Agents
Real estate broking is one of the easiest
business in India as there are no specific
qualification or experience requirements and
also there is no code of practice which sets
accountability, transparency and professional
benchmarks. Hence, there are thousands of
non-professional agents/ brokers in every city
operating without any accountability. Hence, to
bring in transparency and accountability, agents
have also been covered under the ambit of
RERA and registration requirement has been
mandatory for them u/s 9.
Without obtaining registration, real estate agent
shall not facilitate the sale or purchase of or act
on behalf of any person to facilitate the sale or
purchase of any plot, apartment or building, as
the case may be, in a real estate project or part
of it, being the part of the real estate project
registered, being sold by the promoter in any
planning area.
Every real estate agent shall make an
application to the Authority for registration in
such form, manner, within such time and
accompanied by such fee and documents as
may be prescribed.
The Authority shall, within such period, in such
manner and upon satisfying itself of the fulfilment
of such conditions, as may be prescribed
a) Grant a single registration to the real estate
agent for the entire State or Union territory, as
the case may be;
b) Reject the application for reasons to be
recorded in writing, if such application does not
conform to the provisions of the Act or the rules
or regulations made there under:
Application shall not be rejected unless the
applicant has been given an opportunity of being
heard in the matter.
Where any real estate agent who has been
granted registration under this Act commits
breach of any of the conditions thereof or any
other terms and conditions specified under this
Act or any rules or regulations made there under,
or where the Authority is satisfied that such
registration has been secured by the real estate
agent through misrepresentation or fraud, the
Authority may, without prejudice to any other
provisions under this Act, revoke the registration
or suspend the same for such period as it thinks
fit:
Provided that no such revocation or suspension
shall be made by the Authority unless an
opportunity of being heard has been given to the
real estate agent.
No deposit or advance to be taken by promoter
without first entering into agreement for sale
A promoter shall not accept a sum more than
10% of the cost of the apartment, plot, or
building as the case may be, as an advance
payment or an application fee, from a person
without first entering into a written agreement for
sale with such person and register the said
agreement for sale, under any law for the time
being in force.
Structural Defect
In case any structural defect or any other defect
in workmanship, quality or provision of services
or any other obligations of the promoter as per
the agreement for sale relating to such
development is brought to the notice of the
promoter within a period of five years by the
allottee from the date of handing over
possession, it shall be the duty of the promoter
to rectify such defects without further charge,
within 30 days, and in the event of promoter's
failure to rectify such defects within such time,
the aggrieved allottees shall be entitled to
receive appropriate compensation in the manner
as provided under the Act.
Obligations of promoter in case of transfer of a
real estate project to a third party
The promoter shall not transfer or assign his
majority rights and liabilities in respect of a real
estate project to a third party without obtaining
prior written consent from twothird allottees,
except the promoter, and without the prior written
approval of the Authority:
However such transfer or assignment shall not
affect the allotment or sale of the apartments,
plots or buildings as the case may be, in the real
estate project made by the erstwhile promoter.
Obligations of promoter regarding insurance of
real estate project
The promoter shall obtain all such insurances as
may be notified by the appropriate Government,
including but not limited to insurance in respect
of
i. title of the land and building as a part of the
real estate project; and
ii. construction of the real estate project.
The promoter shall be liable to pay the premium
and charges in respect of the insurance and
shall pay the same before transferring the
insurance to the association of the allottees.
The insurance shall stand transferred to the
benefit of the allottee or the association of
allottees, as the case may be, at the time of
promoter entering into an agreement for sale
with the allottee. On formation of the association
of the allottees, all documents relating to the
insurance shall be handed over to the
association of the allottees.
Transfer of title
The promoter shall execute a registered
conveyance deed in favour of the allottee along
with the undivided proportionate title in the
common areas to the association of the allottees
or the competent authority, as the case may be,
and hand over the physical possession of the
plot, apartment of building, as the case may be,
to the allottees and the common areas to the
association of the allottees or the competent
authority, as the case may be, in a real estate
project, and the other title documents pertaining
thereto within specified period as per sanctioned
plans as provided under the local laws.
Provided that, in the absence of any local law,
conveyance deed in favour of the allottee or the
association of the allottees or the competent
authority, as the case may be, under this section
shall be carried out by the promoter within three
months from date of issue of occupancy
certificate.
After obtaining the occupancy certificate and
handing over physical possession to the
allottees, it shall be the responsibility of the
promoter to handover the necessary documents
and plans, including common areas, to the
association of the allottees or the competent
authority, as the case may be, as per the local
laws.
Provided that, in the absence of any local law,
the promoter shall handover the necessary
documents and plans, including common areas,
the association of the allottees or the competent
authority, as the case may be, within thirty days
after obtaining the occupancy certificate.
Return of amount and compensation
If the promoter fails to complete or is unable to
give possession of an apartment, plot or building,
a) in accordance with the terms of the
agreement for sale or, as the case may be, duly
completed by the date specified therein; or
b) due to discontinuance of his business as a
developer on account of suspension or
revocation of the registration under this Act or for
any other reason,
he shall be liable on demand to the allottees, in
case the allottee wishes to withdraw from the
project, without prejudice to any other remedy
available, to return the amount received by him
in respect of that apartment, plot, building, as the
case may be, with interest at such rate as may
be prescribed in this behalf including
compensation in the manner as provided under
this Act.
If the promoter fails to discharge any other
obligations imposed on him under this Act or the
rules or regulations made thereunder or in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the
agreement for sale, he shall be liable to pay
such compensation to the allottees, in the
manner as provided under this Act.
Establishment and incorporation of Real Estate
Regulatory Authority
The appropriate Government shall establish an
Authority to be known as the Real Estate
Regulatory Authority to exercise the powers
conferred on it and to perform the functions
assigned to it under the Act.
The appropriate Government of two or more
States or Union territories may, if it deems fit,
establish one single Authority. Further, the
appropriate Government may, if it deems fit,
establish more than one Authority in a State or
Union territory, as the case may be.
The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and
not less than two whole time Members to be
appointed by the appropriate Government. Term
of office of Chairperson and Members
1. The Chairperson and Members shall hold
office for a term not exceeding five years from
the date on which they enter upon their office, or
until they attain the age of sixty-five years,
whichever is earlier and shall not be eligible for
re-appointment.
2. Before appointing any person as a
Chairperson or Member, the appropriate
Government shall satisfy itself that the person
does not have any such financial or other interest
as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as
such Member.
Removal of Chairperson and Members from
office in certain circumstances
Section 26 deals with Removal of Chairperson
and Members from office in certain
circumstances.
Sub-section(1) states that the appropriate
Government may, in accordance with the
procedure notified, remove from office the
Chairperson or other Members, if the
Chairperson or such other Member, as the case
may be,
a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or
b) has been convicted of an offence, involving
moral turpitude; or
c) has become physically or mentally incapable
of acting as a Member; or
d) has acquired such financial or other interest
as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions; or
e) has so abused his position as to render his
continuance in office prejudicial to the public
interest.
(2) The Chairperson or Member shall not be
removed from his office on the ground specified
under clause (d) or clause (e) of sub-section (1)
except by an order made by the appropriate
Government after an inquiry made by a Judge of
the High Court in which such Chairperson or
Member has been informed of the charges
against him and given a reasonable opportunity
of being heard in respect of those charges.
Power to issue interim orders
Where during an inquiry, the Authority is satisfied
that an act in contravention of the Act, or the
rules and regulations made thereunder, has
been committed and continues to be committed
or that such act is about to be committed, the
Authority may, by order, restrain any promoter,
allottee or real estate agent from carrying on
such act until the conclusion of such inquiry of
until further orders, without giving notice to such
party, where the Authority deems it necessary.
Powers of Authority to issue directions
The Authority may, for the purpose of
discharging its functions under the provisions of
this Act or rules or regulations made thereunder,
issue such directions from time to time, to the
promoters or allottees or real estate agents, as
the case may be, as it may consider necessary
and such directions shall be binding on all
concerned.
Rectification of orders
The Authority may, at any time within a period of
two years from the date of the order made under
the Act, with a view to rectifying any mistake
apparent from the record, amend any order
passed by it, and shall make such amendment, if
the mistake is brought to its notice by the parties.
It may be noted that no such amendment shall
be made in respect of any order against which
an appeal has been preferred under the Act:


3. The Central Advisory Council shall consist of
representatives of the Ministry of Finance,
Ministry of Industry and Commerce, Ministry of
Urban Development, Ministry of Consumer
Affairs, Minstry of Corporate Affairs, Ministry of
Law and Justice, NitiAayog, National Housing
Bank, Housing and Urban Development
Corporation, five representatives of State
Governments to be selected by rotation, five
representatives of the Real Estate Regulatory
Authorities to be selected by rotation, and any
other Central Government department as
notified.
4. The Central Advisory Council shall also
consist of not more than ten members to
represent the interests of real estate industry,
consumers, real estate agents, construction
labourers, non-governmental organisations and
academic and research bodies in the real estate
sector.
THE REAL ESTATE APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
Real Estate Appellate Tribunal (REAT) is to be
formed by appropriate government to ensure
faster resolution of disputes. Parties aggrieved
by the RERA order can appeal before REAT and
REAT has to adjudicate such cases within 60
days. Civil Courts have been prevented from
exercising jurisdiction on such matters. If any of
the parties is not satisfied with the REAT order
they can file an appeal against the REAT order
to the High Court within 60 days.
Establishment of Real Estate Appellate Tribunal
1. The appropriate Government shall, establish
an Appellate Tribunal to be known as the (name
of the State/Union territory) Real Estate
Appellate Tribunal.
2. The appropriate Government may, if it deems
necessary, establish one or more benches of the
Appellate Tribunal, for various jurisdictions, in
the State or Union territory, as the case may be.
3. Every bench of the Appellate Tribunal shall
consist of at least one Judicial Member and one
Administrative or Technical Member.
4. The appropriate Government of two or more
States or Union territories may, if it deems fit,
establish one single Appellate Tribunal.
5. Any person aggrieved by any direction or
decision or order made by the Authority or by an
adjudicating officer under the Act may prefer an
appeal before the Appellate Tribunal having
jurisdiction over the matter.
It may be noted that where a promoter files an
appeal with the Appellate Tribunal, it shall not be
entertained, without the promoter first having
deposited with the Appellate Tribunal atleast
thirty per cent. of the penalty, or such higher
percentage as may be determined by the
Appellate Tribunal, or the total amount to be paid
to the allottee including interest and
compensation imposed on him, if any, or with
both, as the case may be, before the said appeal
is heard.
Application for settlement of disputes and
appeals to Appellate Tribunal
Section 44 of the Act deals with Application for
settlement of disputes and appeals to Appellate
Tribunal. It provides that:
The appropriate Government or the competent
authority or any person aggrieved by any
direction or order or decision of the Authority or
the adjudicating officer may prefer an appeal to
the Appellate Tribunal.
Every appeal made to the Appellate Tribunal
shall be preferred within a period of sixty days
from the date on which a copy of the direction or
order or decision made by the Authority or the
adjudicating officer is received by the
appropriate Government or the competent
authority or the aggrieved person and it shall be
in such form and accompanied by such fee, as
may be prescribed.
Provided that where any such appeal could not
be disposed of within the said period of sixty
days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its
reasons in writing for not disposing of the appeal
within that period.
The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a
Chairperson and not less than two whole time
Members of which one shall be a Judicial
member and other shall be a Technical or
Administrative Member
Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson
and Members
A person shall not be qualified for appointment
as the Chairperson or a Member of the
Appellate Tribunal unless he,
a) in the case of Chairperson, is or has been a
Judge of a High Court; and
b) in the case of a Judicial Member he has held a
judicial office in the territory of India for at least
fifteen years or has been a member of the Indian
Legal Service and has held the post of Additional
Secretary of that service or any equivalent post,
or has been an advocate for at least twenty
years with experience in dealing with real estate
matters; and
c) in the case of a Technical or Administrative
Member, he is a person who is wellversed in the
field of urban development, housing, real estate
development, infrastructure, economics,
planning, law, commerce, accountancy, industry,
management, public affairs or administration and
possesses experience of at least twenty years in
the field or who has held the post in the Central
Government, or a State Government equivalent
to the post of Additional Secretary to the
Government of India or an equivalent post in the
Central Government or an equivalent post in the
State Government.
The Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal shall
be appointed by the appropriate Government in
consultation with the Chief Justice of High Court
or his nominee.
The judicial Members and Technical or
Administrative Members of the Appellate
Tribunal shall be appointed by the appropriate
Government on the recommendations of a
Selection Committee consisting of the Chief
Justice of the High Court or his nominee, the
Secretary of the Department handling Housing
and the Law Secretary and in such manner as
may be prescribed.
Term of office of Chairperson and Members
1. The Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal or a
Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall hold
office, as such for a term not exceeding five
years from the date on which he enters upon his
office, but shall not be eligible for re-
appointment:
It may be noted that in case a person, who is or
has been a Judge of a High Court, has been
appointed as Chairperson of the Tribunal, he
shall not hold office after he has attained the age
of sixty-seven years.
However no Judicial Member or Technical or
Administrative Member shall hold office after he
has attained the age of sixty-five years.
2. Before appointing any person as Chairperson
or Member, the appropriate Government shall
satisfy itself that the person does not have any
such financial or other interest, as is likely to
affect prejudicially his functions as such member.
Powers of Tribunal
1. The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by
the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by the
principles of natural justice.
2. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the
Appellate Tribunal shall have power to regulate
its own procedure.
3. The Appellate Tribunal shall also not be
bound by the rules of evidence contained in the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
4. The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the
purpose of discharging its functions under this
Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in
respect of the following matters, namely:
a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of
any person and examining him on oath;
b) requiring the discovery and production of
documents;
c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
d) issuing commissions for the examinations of
witnesses or documents;
e) reviewing its decisions;
f) dismissing an application for default or
directing it ex parte; and
g) any other matter which may be prescribed.
5. All proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal
shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings
within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228
for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian
Penal Code, and the Appellate Tribunal shall be
deemed to be civil court for the purposes of
section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Right to legal representation
Section 56 deals with Right to legal
representation. It provides that
The applicant or appellant may either appear in
person or authorise one or more chartered
accountants or company secretaries or cost
accountants or legal practitioners or any of its
officers to present his or its case before the
Appellate Tribunal or the Regulatory Authority or
the adjudicating officer, as the case may be.
Orders passed by Appellate Tribunal to be
executable as a decree
Every order made by the Appellate Tribunal
under this Act shall be executable by the
Appellate Tribunal as a decree of civil court, and
for this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal shall
have all the powers of a civil court.
The Appellate Tribunal may transmit any order
made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction
and such civil court shall execute the order as if
it were a decree made by the court.
Appeal to High Court
Any person aggrieved by any decision or order
of the Appellate Tribunal may, file an appeal to
the High Court, within a period of sixty days from
the date of communication of the decision or
order of the Appellate Tribunal to him on any one
or more of the grounds specified in section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
The High Court may entertain the appeal after
the expiry of the said period of sixty days, if it is
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in
time.
Real Estate Regulatory Authority and Appellate
Tribunal

ROLE OF COMPANY SECRETARIES
Almost every kind of organization whose affairs
are conducted by boards, councils or other
corporate structures, be it a company, trust,
association, federation, authority, commission or
the like find it useful to appoint a person who
holds the qualification of Company Secretaryship
in key administrative position.
Practising Company Secretaries have been
authorized to issue Certificate regarding
compliance of conditions of Corporate
Governance. Practising Company Secretaries
have also been recognized to appear before
various Tribunals such as NCLT, NCLAT,
Securities Appellate Tribunal, Competition
Commission of India, Telecom Disputes
Settlement and Appellate Tribunal, Consumer
Forums, Tax Tribunals etc. Reserve Bank of
India has also recognized the Practising
Company Secretaries to undertake Diligence
Report for Banks.
The rapid Change in Indian Legislative has
brought about a sea change in the role and
profile of a company secretary. They are now
being seen as corporate development planners.
Besides embarking upon traditional areas of
practice, Company Secretaries in Practice are
increasingly required to advise and guide on
legal aspects of business which intimately
concern areas such as registration under RERA,
production, drafting of various documents.
Company Secretaries - One Stop Professional
Advisory Services for Real Estate Projects
Company Secretaries holding Certificate of
Practice by becoming an expert in the act can
indulge in providing advice in respect of:
Financial Advisory Services
Various applicable provision particular on real
estate project
Registration and extension procedure of real
estate project with competent authority
Various obligation, functions and duties of
promoter in a real estate project
Penal Provisions under the Act
Funding Options for Real Estate Project
Taxation aspects for Real Estate Project

Lesson 15: Intellectual Property Rights
Introduction
 Any original work of the human intellect,
including works of art, literature, technology, and
science, is considered to be a work of intellectual
property (IP)
 It is the result of persons Intellectual Activities.
Thus Intellectual Property refers to creation of
mind such as inventions, designs for industrial
articles, literary, artistic work, symbols which are
ultimately used in commerce.
 The legal privileges granted to the inventor or
creator to safeguard his invention or creativity for
a predetermined amount of time are known as
intellectual property rights
(IPR)
 Intellectual Property rights allow the creators or
owners to have the benefits from their works
when these are exploited commercially.

Nature of Intellectual Property
 Intangible Rights over Tangible Property: IP's
intangibility is the primary characteristic that sets
it apart from other types of property. When works
are exploited for commercial purposes, it
enables the creators or owners to profit from their
creations.
 Right to sue: IP is a resource that can be
owned and managed, to use the language of the
law. Since intellectual property (IP) is a property
right, it can be inherited, purchased, gifted, sold,
licenced, entrusted, or pledged. Subject to
certain restrictions, the owner of an IPR owns a
sort of property that can be used however they
like. They also have the legal right to sue anyone
who uses their innovation without their
permission and to be compensated with actual
property.
 Rights and Duties: IP results in both obligations
and property rights. The owner of the IP is
entitled to carry out specific tasks in connection
with his creations. He has the sole authority to
create, copy, sell, and otherwise exploit the
work. Additionally, there is a negative right that
bars others from using their statutory rights.
 Coexistence of different rights: Various IPR
kinds may coexist. For instance, an image of an
innovation might be copyrighted and the
invention itself might be patented.
 Exhaustion of rights: Exhaustion fundamentally
means that after the first sale made by the right
holder or by the authority designated for its
exhaustion, that person's right expires and he is
no longer permitted to halt the movement of the
goods moving forward. As a result, once an IP
rights holder has sold a physical good that bears
IPRs, it cannot stop subsequent sales of the
good. The first consent marks the end of the
right. It is prohibited to use the exclusive selling
privilege in connection to the same items twice.
 Dynamism: IPR is undergoing continual
improvement. New things are being added to the
IPR scope and the scope of its protection is
being enlarged in accordance with the demands
of scientific and technical advancement.
Eg: Biopatents, Software Copyrights, Plant
Diversity Protection

Need of Intellectual Property
 Every invention involves labour, time, and
resources.

 The length of each project varies substantially.
It could be anything from a few seconds to a few
years.
 A certain amount of actual money is also
necessary for any creative endeavour, along
with education or knowledge of course.
 Any creative professional making all of these
investments is making a significant one.
Therefore, it is important to acknowledge and
honour a creator's intellectual works.
 The word "intellectual property" did not become
common usage until the 19th century, despite
the fact that many of the legal rules governing
intellectual property rights have developed over
centuries.
 It wasn't until the latter half of the 20th century
that it spread throughout much of the world. In
1967, the World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO) was founded as a UN
body. Since then, the phrase has gained
significant traction in the US.
 A comprehensive international system for
defining, safeguarding, and upholding intellectual
property rights exists. It consists of multilateral
treaty systems as well as international
organisations like the European Union, World
Trade Organization, World Intellectual Property
Organization, World Customs Organization, and
United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law
(UNCITRAL).

                                                        GATS is a set
                                                        of rules that
                                                        govern global
The General Agreement on Trade in Services              trade in
(GATS)                                                 services.
 It was created in 1995 after the Uruguay Round
of talks.
 GATS is like a sibling to the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), which
deals with goods.
 The main goals of GATS are to have fair and
reliable trade rules, treat everyone equally, and
promote economic growth.
 GATS has three levels of rules: basic
principles, sector-specific rules, and
commitments made by individual countries to
allow access to their markets.
 Services are essential for the economy, even
though they represent a smaller share of total
trade.
 GATS helps countries open up their markets for
services and supports their development.
 It encourages gradual trade expansion while
respecting each country's policies and level of
development.
 Developing nations receive extra help through
specific commitments and assistance from the
World Trade Organization (WTO).

World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)
1. Purpose:
 Foster innovation and creativity using
intellectual property as a tool.
 Advance the protection of intellectual property
globally through intergovernmental cooperation
and collaboration with international
organizations.
2. Establishment:
 Founded in 1970 following the WIPO
Convention's entry into effect in 1967.
 Designated as a specialized agency of the
United Nations in 1974.
3. Mission:
 Create a fair and efficient international
intellectual property system.
 Benefit economic, social, and cultural
development in all nations.
4. Mandate Expansion:
 Cooperative agreement with the World Trade
Organization in 1996.
 Demonstrates the importance of intellectual
property rights in globalized trade administration.
5. Key Functions:
 Provide global patent filing and registration
services for trademarks, industrial designs, and
appellations of origin.
 Facilitate dispute resolution for intellectual
property issues.
 Develop international legal IP framework in line
with evolving societal needs.
 Build collaborative networks and technical
platforms for sharing knowledge and simplifying
IP transactions.
 Offer free databases and tools for exchanging
information.
 Assist emerging and developing nations in
establishing legal frameworks and systems for
copyright, patents, and trademarks.
 Provide legal and technical assistance, training,
and treaty negotiation support.
6. Objectives:
 Encourage innovation and creativity.
 Reward creators while promoting economic
growth.
 Safeguard the general welfare.
7. Headquarters: Geneva, Switzerland.

Legal Frameworks under WIPO:
1. Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT):
 Allows global patent protection for inventions.
 Applicants can apply in multiple countries with
one worldwide patent application.
2. Madrid Agreement and Protocol:
 Sets rules for the Madrid System for
International Registration of Marks.
 Enables mark protection across many nations
through one international registration.
3. Vienna Agreement:
 Establishes the International Classification of
Figurative Elements of Marks (Vienna
Classification).
 Deals with marks that include figurative
features.
4. Nice Agreement:
 Deals with the International Classification of
Goods and Services for the Registration of
Marks.
 Ensures standardized classification of goods
and services in trademark applications.
5. Locarno Agreement:
 Creates the Locarno Classification system for
international industrial designs.
 Classifies industrial designs based on their
aesthetic features.
6. WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT):
 Protects works and rights of authors in the
digital realm.
 Covers computer programs and databases
under copyright protection.
7. WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty
(WPPT):
 Protects rights of performers and phonogram
manufacturers in the digital context.
8. WIPO Intergovernmental Committee:
 Engages in negotiations for an international
legal instrument to protect traditional knowledge,
cultural expressions, and genetic resources.
9. Standing Committee on Copyright and
Related Rights (SCCR):
 Addresses copyright and related rights
harmonization issues.
10. Hague System/Agreement:
 Facilitates international registration of industrial
designs in multiple countries with a single
application.
11. Lisbon System/Agreement:
 Provides a single registration process for
securing protection for appellations of origin and
geographical indications in contracting parties.




Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPS)
 TRIPS (Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights) Agreement is essential for
international trade, focusing on innovation,
creativity, and branding value.
 It helps facilitate intellectual property trade and
resolves disputes among WTO members.
 Each country must provide minimum protection
for intellectual property owned by citizens of
other WTO members.
 Countries have flexibility to customize their
methods for IP protection and enforcement to
meet their needs and public policy objectives.
 TRIPS aims to strike a balance between
encouraging innovation and restricting access to
creative works.
 The agreement allows for exceptions to lower
short-term costs through various procedures.
copyright and patents).
 Similar to property rights in movable and
immovable property.

Industrial Property:
 Industrial property is a type of intellectual
property that includes inventions and industrial
designs.
 Inventions are new solutions to technological
problems.
 Industrial designs are aesthetic creations that
determine the appearance of industrial products.
 Industrial property also covers trademarks,
service marks, commercial names, and
designations, including indications of source and
appellations of origin.

The term "Industrial Property" may seem illogical
as it refers to inventions used in industries, but it
also includes trademarks and other marks used
in both commerce and industry.
 The Paris Convention recognizes industrial
property rights for patents, trademarks, service
marks, utility models, industrial designs, and
more.
 Industrial property rights encompass a person's
commercial or industrial activities, covering
inventions, creations, new products,
manufacturing methods, designs, and
distinguishing marks for goods, among others.

Patent:
 A patent is a monopoly award granting the
inventor control over the output and price of the
patented goods.
 Its primary economic justification is to
encourage investment in industrial innovation.
 Patents facilitate the maintenance and growth
of valuable, transferable, and industrial assets
through innovative technologies.
 An innovation that provides a new approach to
a problem or a new technical solution can be
patented.
 Patents give the inventor exclusive rights to the
invention, preventing others from making, using,
selling, or distributing it without permission.
 The patent holder can license the innovation to
others under mutually agreed terms or transfer
ownership.
 A patent is valid for 20 years from the date of
the patent application.
 After the patent expires, the invention becomes
part of the public domain, and anyone can use it
without the patent holder's permission.

Trade Mark:
 A trade mark differentiates goods of one
manufacturer or trader from similar goods of
others.
 It can be a combination of words, characters,
numbers, symbols, or images of people or
animals.
 Trade marks serve as effective advertising for
goods and their quality, establishing a
relationship between the merchant and the items
during commerce.
 Trademark law aims to give businesses
exclusive rights to use, share, or assign a mark
through registration.
 Service marks distinguish one company's
services from others.
 Like inventions and industrial designs, trade
marks are patentable.
They can include various combinations of words,
letters, numbers, symbols, images, and even
sounds.
 Trade marks are typically registered for seven
years but can be renewed indefinitely through
reapplication.
 Owners of trade marks have the sole right to
use them to distinguish their products or services
and can grant permission to others in exchange
for payment.
 Distinctive trade marks help consumers
recognize and choose goods or services based
on their nature and quality.

Copyright
 Origin: Copyright protection started with the
invention of printing, allowing mechanical
duplication of literary works.
 Privileges: Authorities and kings granted
exclusive rights of reproduction and distribution
for a limited period through privileges.
 The Statute of Anne: In 1709, the first copyright
statute was adopted to address criticisms of
privileges.
 Exclusive Right: Copyright emerged as an
exclusive right for authors to copy their literature
and prevent others from doing so.
 Expansion: Copyright laws expanded to cover
literary, artistic, musical works, sound
recordings, films, broadcasts, and more.
 Computer Programs: Computer programs are
also protected under copyright as products of
intellectual skill.
 Copyright Act in India: The Copyright Act in
India governs copyright law, amended multiple
times to adapt to technological advancements
and TRIPs agreement provisions.

Industrial Designs:
 Industrial designs are in the aesthetic field but
serve as patterns for manufacturing industrial or
handicraft products.
 An industrial design includes the ornamental or
aesthetic aspect of a useful article, appealing to
the sense of sight, such as shape, pattern, or
color.
 To be protected, an industrial design must be
new and original.
 Industrial designs are safeguarded against
unauthorized copying or limitation for a period
usually lasting for five, ten, or fifteen years.
 Textile designs were among the first to receive
legal protection.
 In 1787, the first Act for design protection was
enacted in Great Britain to encourage arts of
design and printing linens, cotton, calicoes, and
muslins for a limited time.
The laws relating to patents, designs, and
trademarks were later combined in the Patents,
Designs, and Trade Marks Act in 1883.
 The Indian Patents and Designs Act of 1911
was based on the (British) Patents and Designs
Act of 1907, and design provisions continue
under the Designs Act, 1911.
 The new Designs Act of 2000 has been passed
by the Parliament.

Geographical Indication (GI):
 Geographical Indication (GI) designates a
nation or location as the origin of a product.
 It guarantees quality and uniqueness due to its
geographical origin.
 GIs are exclusive privileges granted to a
community, benefiting all its members.
 Producers or traders from the location with
defining traits may use the GI.
 GIs are covered by WTO's TRIPS agreement,
promoting the protection of geographical
indicators. grants additional protection to
registered GIs. marketing plans, and more.
 The secrecy of trade secrets is essential to
maintain their competitive advantage.
 Trade secrets can be preserved indefinitely as
long as they remain confidential.
 Unauthorized means to obtain trade secrets are
not permissible.

National Intellectual Property Rights Policy:
 The Indian government provides exclusive
rights of intellectual property to safeguard
inventors' works.
 Intellectual property includes copyright, patents,
trademarks, trade names, industrial designs, and
merchandise.
 It ensures quality, safety, and effectiveness of
pharmaceutical products and services.
 The National Intellectual Property Rights Policy
encourages innovation and enhances the
business climate.

It aligns with India's focus on the "Decade of
Innovation."
 The Policy aims to improve access to
healthcare, food security, environmental
protection, and promote creativity and
innovation.
 The goals include creating awareness about
IPRs, stimulating IPR generation, strengthening
legal frameworks, modernizing administration,
commercializing IPRs, enforcing IPRs, and
developing human capital.




Lesson 16: Law relating to Patents
Regulatory Framework for Patents in India
 Patents Act, 1970, and Patents Rules, 2003
regulate patents in India.
 A patent is a statutory right granted for an
invention for a limited period.
 It gives the inventor exclusive rights to control
the patented product or process.
 The patent system stimulates investment in
industrial innovation.
 The Patents Act was enacted in 1970, with
subsequent amendments in 1995, 1999, 2002,
and 2005.
 Patents are granted to promote innovation and
commercial recognition.
 Compulsory licensing and registration of
process patents are also covered.
 Certain products like agricultural products and
nuclear energy inventions are not patentable.

In the case of Bishwanath Prasad Radhey
Shyam v. Hindustan Metal Industries, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India held that:
 The object of Patent law is to encourage
scientific research, new technology, and
industrial progress.
 Granting a limited-time monopoly to own, use,
or sell a patented method or product encourages
the development of new inventions with
commercial value.
 The disclosure of the invention to the Patent
Office, which becomes public domain after a
predetermined duration of the monopoly, is the
cost of the monopoly grant.




Advantages of Patents:
1. Exclusive Rights: Patentees have complete
control over their inventions and can prevent
others from making, using, or selling the
patented product without their permission.
2. Legal Protection: Patentees can enforce their
rights through legal means, filing suits for
infringement and seeking remedies like
injunctions, compensation, and accounting of
profits.
3. Commercial Exploitation: Patentees can
commercially exploit their inventions by selling or
licensing them to others, generating revenue and
profit.
4. Competitive Edge: Patents provide a
competitive advantage, as competitors are
restricted from using the patented technology,
giving the patentee a unique position in the
market.
5. Incentive for Innovation: Patents encourage
scientific research and new technological
developments, as inventors are rewarded for
their innovative contributions.
6. Recognition and Reputation: Having a patent
enhances the reputation of the inventor or the
company, signaling innovation and expertise in
the field.
7. Market Monopoly: Patents grant a limited-time
monopoly to the patentee, allowing them to
enjoy exclusive market rights and higher pricing
power.
8. Licensing Opportunities: Patentees can
license their technology to other companies,
creating collaboration and fostering innovation.
9. Technological Progress: Patents promote the
dissemination of knowledge, as inventors are
required to disclose their invention to the public
after a certain period.
10. Economic Growth: Patents contribute to
economic growth by encouraging investment in
research and development and promoting
technology transfer.

What can be Patented? An invention relating
either to a product or process that is new,
involving inventive step and capable of industrial
application can be patented. However, it must
not fall into the categories of inventions that are
non- patentable under sections 3 and
4 of the Act.

Invention and Patentability:
 Invention is defined under Section 2(1)(j) of the
Patents Act, 1970, as a new product or process
involving an inventive step and capable of
industrial application.
 Capable of industrial application means the
invention can be made or used in an industry, as
per Section 2(1)(ac) of the Act.
 New invention refers to any invention or
technology not anticipated by prior publication or
use before the filing date of the patent
application with complete specification.
 Inventive step involves aspects not obvious to a
person skilled in the relevant field.
 The patent system aims to stimulate innovative
practices and technological development for the
public interest.

What are not Inventions:
1. Frivolous Inventions: Inventions that are trivial
or obviously contrary to wellestablished natural
laws.
2. Contrary to Public Order or Morality:
Inventions that could be against public order or
morality, causing harm to human, animal, plant
life, or the environment.
3. Discoveries of Natural Substances: Mere
discoveries of scientific principles, abstract
theories, living or non-living substances
occurring in nature.
4. New Forms of Known Substances: Mere new
forms or uses of known substances unless they
result in enhanced efficacy.
5. Simple Aggregation: Mere arrangement or
duplication of known devices functioning
independently.
6. Methods of Agriculture or Horticulture:
Exclusion of patents for agricultural or
horticultural methods.
7. Medical Treatments: Processes for the
medical treatment of humans or animals.
8. Plants and Animals (excluding micro-
organisms): Patents not granted for plants and
animals, including seeds, varieties, and species,
and essentially biological processes for their
production or propagation.
9. Mathematical, Business Methods, and
Computer Programs: Methods or computer
programs per se, mathematical algorithms, or
business methods.
10. Literary, Artistic, and Aesthetic Works:
Excluding cinematographic works and television
productions.
11. Mental Acts and Games: Schemes, methods
of performing mental acts or playing games.
12. Presentations of Information: Protection not
granted for mere presentations of information.
13. Topography of Integrated Circuits: Not
eligible for patent protection.
14. Traditional Knowledge: Inventions related to
traditional knowledge or aggregation/duplication
of known properties.
15. Atomic Energy: No patents granted for
inventions related to atomic energy under the
Atomic Energy Act, 1962.




What are the Criteria of Patentability?
An invention is patentable subject matter if it
meets the following criteria - ? It should be novel.
? It should have inventive step or it must be non-
obvious.
? It should be capable of Industrial application.
? It should not attract the provisions of section 3
and 4 of the Patents Act, 1970.

Persons Entitled to make Application for Patent
 Section 6 of the Patents Act allows for the filing
of a patent application by different persons.
 The application can be made by the true and
first inventor of the invention (a).
 It can also be made by the assignee of the true
and first inventor, who has the right to file the
application (b).
 In case the inventor has passed away, the legal
representative of the deceased inventor can file
the application (c).
 The application can be made by any of these
persons alone or jointly with others.
 The term "assignee" includes the legal
representative of a deceased assignee, and
references to the assignee of any person include
references to the assignee of the legal
representative or assignee of that person.
Form of Application and Provisional & Complete
Specification
The Specification is a techno-legal document
containing scientific and technical disclosure and
claims for the invention which is the basis of
rights of a patent. The Specification, thus, forms
a crucial part of the patent application.
 Section 7 of the Patents Act requires every
patent application to be made for one invention
only.
 If the application is made based on an
assignment of the right to apply for a patent,
proof of the right must be furnished.
 International applications under the Patent
Cooperation Treaty (PCT) designating India are
deemed to be applications under the Act if a
corresponding application has also been filed
before the Controller in India.
 Applications filed under the Act, not being
convention applications or PCT applications,
must be accompanied by a provisional or
complete specification.
 If the application is accompanied by a
provisional specification, a complete
specification must be filed within twelve months
from the date of filing. Failure to do so will result
in the application being deemed abandoned.
 In some cases, where multiple applications by
the same applicant are related, the Controller
may allow one complete specification to cover all
provisional specifications.
 If an application is filed with a specification
purporting to be complete, the Controller may,
upon request, treat it as a provisional
specification within twelve months from the filing
date.
 A complete specification filed in response to a
provisional specification may be postdated to the
date of filing of the complete specification if
requested before the grant of the patent.

Contents of Specifications
 Patent Specifications: The patent specification
is a crucial document that describes the
invention and its operation. It must begin with a
clear title indicating the subject matter.
 Complete Specifications: A complete
specification provides a detailed description of
the invention, its method of operation, and the
best way to perform it. It must also include one
or more claims defining the scope of the
invention for which protection is sought.
 Provisional Specifications: Provisional
specifications are filed initially and must be
followed by a complete specification within
twelve months. Failure to do so may result in the
application being deemed abandoned.
 Abstract: Every specification must be
accompanied by an abstract that provides
technical information on the invention.
 Biological Materials: If the specification
mentions a biological material that cannot be
fully described, it must be deposited with an
International Depository Authority under the
Budapest Treaty.
 International Applications: International
applications designating India will be treated as
having a complete specification based on the
materials filed with the application.
 Commercial Gain: Patents are sought for
commercial gain, and exclusivity in the market is
achieved through clear and novel descriptions in
the patent specification.
 Exploitation of Patents: Patentees can exploit
their patents through marketing strategies,
licensing, or assignment to third parties.
 Increasing Monetary Value: The monetary
value of a patented invention can increase over
time.
 Rights and Exclusivity: Patents grant exclusive
commercial rights to the inventor, preventing
unauthorized usage by others.
 Commercial Strategies: Patents can be
commercially exploited through marketing
strategies and licensing agreements.

Publication of Patent Applications
 Section 11A of the Patents Act deals with the
publication of patent applications.
 Normally, patent applications are not made
public for a specific period, keeping the invention
confidential.
 An applicant can request the Controller to
publish their application before the prescribed
period if they want to make it public earlier.
 The publication includes important information
such as the date of application, application
number, applicant's name and address, and an
abstract of the invention.
 Some applications may not be published, like
those with secrecy directions, abandoned
applications, or withdrawn applications before
the prescribed period.
 Once an application is published, it becomes
accessible to the public.
 From the date of publication until the patent is
granted, the applicant has similar rights and
privileges as if the patent has been granted
already. However, they cannot take legal action
for infringement until the patent is granted.
 The rights of the patentee for applications
made before January 1, 2005, start from the date
of patent grant.
 After the patent is granted, the patent holder
can only receive a reasonable royalty from
certain enterprises that were already producing
and marketing the product before January 1,
2005. No infringement proceedings can be
started against such enterprises.


Request for Examination:
 An application for a patent must be examined
upon request by the applicant or any other
interested person.
 The request must be made within the
prescribed period.
Examination Process:
 The application and related documents are
referred to an examiner for a report.
 The examiner checks if the application meets
legal requirements and if there are any
objections to granting the patent.
 The examiner also investigates for any prior
publications or claims that may anticipate the
invention.
invention confidential. public.
 The Controller can also post-date the
application upon the applicant's request within
specific time limits.
Anticipation:
 The Controller can refuse the application if the
invention has been anticipated by prior
publications or claims.
 The applicant can defend against refusal by
proving priority dates or amending the
specification.
Consideration and Communication:
 If the examiner's report is adverse, the
Controller must communicate the concerns to
the applicant and allow them a hearing.


Powers of the Controller:
 The Controller has the power to refuse the
application or require amendments if it does not
comply with the Act and rules.
 The Controller can post-date, amend, or refuse
the application based on the examination results.

Potential Infringement and Reference to Other
Patents
1. Patent Infringement:
 Patent infringement is the violation of the
exclusive rights of the patent holder.
 The Patents Act grants the patent holder the
exclusive right to prevent others from making,
using, selling, or manufacturing the patented
invention.
2. Exclusive Rights of Patent Holder:
 The patent holder has a monopoly over the
patented invention during the valid term of the
patent.
 Any activity that violates this monopoly can be
considered patent infringement.
3. Relief for Patent Infringement:
 In cases of patent infringement, the patent
holder can sue the infringing party for relief and
compensation.
4. Investigation by the Controller:
 The Controller can investigate if an invention in
a patent application may infringe another patent
claim.
 If substantial risk of infringement is found, the
Controller may direct a reference to the other
patent in the applicant's specification.
5. Inserting Reference to Another Patent:
 The reference to another patent is inserted in
the applicant's specification to inform the public
of the potential infringement.
6. Deletion of Reference:
 If the other patent is revoked, amended, or
found invalid, the Controller can delete the
reference in the applicant's specification.




Substitution of Applicants in Patent Applications
1. Section 20 of the Patents Act allows for the
substitution of applicants in a patent application.
2. If a claim is made in the prescribed manner
before the patent is granted, the Controller may
direct that the application shall proceed in the
name of the claimant or claimants instead of the
original applicant.
3. This claim can be based on an assignment or
agreement in writing made by the original
applicant, or by operation of law.
4. The Controller's direction may be given to
reflect the rightful ownership of the patent or an
undivided share of it.
5. For joint applicants, the direction can only be
given with the consent of the other joint
applicants.
6. If one of the joint applicants dies before the
patent is granted, the Controller may allow the
application to proceed in the name of the
surviving joint applicant(s) with the consent of
the deceased applicant's legal representative.
7. In case of disputes between joint applicants,
the Controller may give directions after hearing
all parties concerned to enable the application to
proceed or regulate its manner.
This provision ensures that the rightful owners or
claimants of the patent can be appropriately
reflected in the application, even if changes or
disputes arise during the process.
Time for Completing Patent Application Process
(Section 21)
 Section 21 of the Patents Act sets a time limit
for completing the patent application process.
 If the applicant fails to comply with all the
requirements imposed by the Act within the
prescribed period, the application is deemed
abandoned.
 The period starts from the date on which the
first statement of objections to the application or
complete specification is forwarded to the
applicant by the Controller.
 If any documents are returned to the applicant
during the proceedings, they must be re-filed or
explained to the Controller to be considered as
compliance.
 If an appeal to the High Court is pending for the
main invention or a patent of addition, the time
for compliance may be extended until the High
Court determines a date.
 If the appeal time has not expired, the
Controller may grant a further extension for
compliance.
 If the High Court grants an extension for
compliance during the further period, the
requirements must be met within the time
granted by the Court.

Opposition to the Grant of Patent (Section 25)
Section 25 of the Patents Act deals with the
process of opposing the grant of a patent. It
allows any person to file a written representation,
known as opposition, against the grant of

a patent. The opposition can be made on various
grounds, and the Controller will hear the
opposition and decide whether to grant the
patent or not.
The grounds for opposition include:
 Wrongful acquisition of the invention by the
applicant or someone related to them.
 Prior publication of the invention before the
priority date of the claim in another application or
document.
 Claiming the invention in a complete
specification published on or after the priority
date of the applicant's claim.
 Public knowledge or use of the invention in
India before the priority date of the claim.
 Obviousness of the invention, meaning it does
not involve any inventive step.
 Non-disclosure or false information provided by
the applicant to the Controller.
 Failure to disclose the source of geographical
origin of biological material used in the invention.
 Anticipation of the invention based on
knowledge available within any local or
indigenous community in India or elsewhere.

Section 25(2) allows any interested person to
oppose the grant of a patent by giving notice of
opposition to the Controller.
 The opposition can be made within one year
from the date of publication of the grant of the
patent.
 Grounds for opposition include wrongful
acquisition of the invention, prior publication of
the invention, lack of novelty or inventive step,
non-disclosure, false information by the
patentee, and anticipation of the invention based
on knowledge available within any local or
indigenous community in India or elsewhere.
 The Controller will hear the opposition and
decide whether to grant the patent or not based
on the grounds raised in the opposition.

Residents not to Apply for Patents Outside India
Without Prior Permission
 Section 39 of the Patents Act says that people
living in India cannot apply for patents in other
countries without permission.
 Before applying for a foreign patent, they must
get written permission from the Controller, a
government authority.
 They need to file their patent application in
India at least six weeks before applying abroad
and make sure no restrictions are in place.
The Controller must decide on the permit
application within a certain time, but if the
invention is related to defense or atomic energy,
the Central Government's consent is needed.
 The rule does not apply if someone living
outside India files the patent application in their
own country first.

GRANT OF PATENTS. Section 43
 Once an application for a patent is found to be
in order and meets all the requirements of the
Act, the patent is granted to the applicant or
applicants.
 If the Controller does not refuse the application
and finds it to be compliant with the Act, the
patent is granted as quickly as possible.
 The patent is granted with the seal of the
patent office, and the date of granting is
recorded in the register.
 The Controller is also required to publish the
grant of the patent, making the application,
specification, and related documents open for
public inspection

Grant of Patents Subject to Conditions
 Section 47 of the Patents Act deals with the
grant of patents subject to certain conditions.
 The grant of a patent comes with certain
conditions, such as allowing the government to
use the patented invention or process for its own
use.
 The government is permitted to import or make
any machine, apparatus, or article covered by
the patent solely for its own use.
 The government is also allowed to use any
process covered by the patent for its own use.
 Additionally, any person is permitted to use the
patented invention or process for the purpose of
experimentation or research, including
instructing students.
 For patents related to medicines or drugs, the
government is allowed to import and distribute
the medicine or drug for its own use or for use in
government medical institutions.


Rights of Patentees
 Section 48 of the Patents Act outlines the rights
granted to patentees.
 If the subject matter of the patent is a product,
the patentee has the exclusive right to prevent
others from making, using, offering for sale,
selling, or importing that product in India without
their consent.
If the subject matter of the patent is a process,
the patentee has the exclusive right to prevent
others from using that process and from using,
offering for sale, selling, or importing the product
obtained directly by that process in India without
their consent.

Term of Patent
 The term of a patent is 20 years from the date
of filing the patent application.
 For international applications filed under the
Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) designating
India, the term is 20 years from the international
filing date.
 If the renewal fee is not paid within the
prescribed period, the patent will cease to have
effect.
 Once the patent right ceases due to non-
payment of renewal fee or on the expiry of the
term, the subject matter covered by the patent
will no longer be protected.

Patents of Addition
 Patents of addition are granted for
improvements or modifications of an existing
invention described in the main patent
application.
 The Controller may grant a patent of addition if
the applicant requests it and if the main
invention is also the subject of a pending or
granted patent application.
 The term of a patent of addition is the same as
the term of the main patent or until the main
patent expires, whichever is earlier.
 No renewal fees are payable for patents of
addition, but if a patent of addition becomes an
independent patent, the same fees as for an
independent patent will be payable.
 The validity of patents of addition cannot be
questioned solely based on the lack of an
inventive step compared to the main invention or
any other improvement or modification of the
main invention.
Restoration of Lapsed Patents
 Restoring Lapsed Patents: If a patent has
expired because the renewal fee was not paid
on time, the patentee or their legal
representative can apply to get it reinstated.
 Time Limit: The application for restoration must
be made within eighteen months from the date
the patent lapsed.
 Joint Patents: If the patent was jointly held by
multiple people, one or more of them can apply
for restoration without involving the others.
 Controller's Decision: The application is
submitted to the Controller, who will review the
case and decide whether to grant or reject the
restoration.
 Timely Application: It is crucial to apply within
the specified time frame and provide valid
reasons for the delay in paying the renewal fee.
Restoration Approval: If the application is
approved, the patent will be restored, and its
validity will be reinstated.


Procedure for disposal of applications for
restoration of lapsed patents
 Application for Restoration: The patentee or
their legal representative can apply for
restoration of a lapsed patent by submitting an
application to the Controller.
 Prima Facie Satisfaction: The Controller will
review the application and, if prima facie
satisfied that the failure to pay the renewal fee
was unintentional and there was no undue delay
in applying for restoration, they will publish the
application.
 Opposition to Restoration: During the
publication period, any interested person can
oppose the restoration by giving notice to the
Controller. The opposition can be based on the
grounds that the failure to pay the renewal fee
was not unintentional or that there was undue
delay in applying for restoration.
 Opportunity to be Heard: If an opposition is
received, the Controller will notify the applicant
and the opponent and provide them with an
opportunity to be heard before making a
decision.
 Restoration Decision: If no opposition is
received or if the Controller's decision is in favor
of the applicant, the patent will be restored upon
payment of any unpaid renewal fee and
additional prescribed fees.
 Additional Requirements: The Controller may
require the applicant to enter certain documents
or information in the register as a condition of
restoring the patent.

Surrender and Revocation of Patent
 Surrender of Patent: The patentee can
voluntarily surrender their patent at any time by
giving notice to the Controller.
 Publication and Notice: The Controller will
publish the offer to surrender the patent and
notify other interested parties listed in the patent
register.
 Opposition to Surrender: Any interested person
can oppose the surrender of the patent by giving
notice to the Controller within the prescribed
period after publication.
 Decision: After hearing the patentee and any
opponent, if applicable, the Controller will decide
whether to accept the offer to surrender the
patent. If satisfied that the surrender is
appropriate, the Controller will revoke the patent
by order.

Revocation Grounds: A patent may be revoked
on the following grounds:
1. When the invention claimed in a valid claim
has an earlier priority date and is already
included in another granted patent in India.
2. When the patent application was filed by a
person who is not entitled under the Act and was
granted a patent on that application.
3. When the patent was wrongfully obtained, and
the rights of the petitioner or anyone claiming
through them were violated.
4. When the subject of a claim in the complete
specification is not an invention under the Act.
5. When the invention is not new or lacks
inventive step, considering what was publicly
known, used, or published before the priority
date of the claim.
6. When the invention is not useful.
7. When the description of the invention or
method in the complete specification is
insufficient to enable someone skilled in the art
to work the invention.
8. When the scope of any claim is not properly
defined or based on undisclosed matter.
9. When a false suggestion or representation
was made to obtain the patent.
10. When the subject of any claim is not
patentable under the Act.
11. When the invention was secretly used in
India before the priority date of the claim

Compulsory licenses
Compulsory licenses are permissions granted to
a third-party by the Controller General to use or
sell a patented product or use a patented
process without the patent owner's permission.
This concept is recognized both nationally in the
Indian Patent Act, 1970, and internationally in
the TRIPS Agreement. To obtain a compulsory
license, certain conditions specified in sections
84-92 must be met. These conditions ensure
that the compulsory license is granted in specific
situations and for valid reasons, such as the
public's reasonable requirements not being met
or the patented invention not being available at
an affordable price.

Section 84 of the Patent Act allows any
interested person to apply for a compulsory
license on a patent after three years from its
grant. The grounds for applying for a compulsory
license are as follows:
a) The reasonable needs of the public regarding
the patented invention have not been fulfilled.
b) The patented invention is not available to the
public at an affordable price.
c) The patented invention is not being used in
India.
Any person can apply for a compulsory license,
even if they already hold a license under the
patent. No one can be prevented from claiming
that the reasonable needs of the public are not
being met or that the patented invention is not
being used in India based on any previous
statements or actions.
The application for a compulsory license must
include a statement describing the applicant's
interest and the reasons for the application. The
Controller may grant the license if he is satisfied
that the reasonable needs of the public are not
being met or if the patented invention is not
being used in India, based on the provided
information

Revocation of Patents by the Controller for Non-
Working
1. Section 85 of the Patent Act deals with
revocation of patents for non-working.
2. After two years from the date of granting the
first compulsory license, the Central Government
or any interested person may apply for
revocation.
3. Grounds for revocation include: a) Non-
working of the patented invention in the territory
of India. b) Failure to meet the reasonable
requirements of the public. c) Not making the
patented invention available at a reasonably
affordable price.
4. The application for revocation should provide
specific details and facts supporting the grounds
for revocation.
5. The Controller will consider the application
and determine if a prima facie case for
revocation exists.
6. If satisfied, the Controller will direct the
applicant to serve copies of the application to the
patentee and others interested.
7. The application will be published in the Official
Journal.
8. The patentee or any other person can oppose
the application within the prescribed time and
provide reasons for opposition.
9. If an opposition is received, both parties will
have an opportunity to be heard before a
decision is made.
10. The Controller has the power to grant
compulsory licenses to applicants and may
direct licenses for other patents held by the
same patentee if reasonable requirements are
not met.
11. The Controller can also amend or cancel
existing licenses if necessary.

International Arrangements
1. Sections 133 to 139 of the Patent Act deal
with international arrangements.
2. Section 133 deals with convention countries,
which are countries or organizations that are
signatories to international treaties or
conventions related to patents and provide
similar privileges to applicants in India.
3. Section 134 notifies countries that do not
provide reciprocity in patent rights to citizens of
India. In such countries, Indian nationals cannot
apply for patents, be registered as patent
owners, or hold licenses under patents granted in
those countries.
4. Section 135 provides for convention
applications, allowing an applicant who has filed
for a patent in a convention country to claim
priority within 12 months of the first application's
filing date.
5. Section 136 contains special provisions for
convention applications, requiring a complete
specification and providing guidelines for the
application's date and content. 6. Section 137
allows for multiple priorities when an applicant
files similar patent applications in different
convention countries.
7. Section 138 requires the applicant of a
convention application to furnish copies of
specifications filed in convention countries and
verified by the Controller.
8. The Controller may not accept a convention
application post-dated beyond the date the
application could have been made under the Act




Lesson 17: Law relating to Trade Marks
Sources of Trademark Laws
 The national statues i.e., the Trade Marks Act,
1999 and rules made thereunder.
 International Multilateral Convention.
 National Bilateral Treaty.
 Regional Treaty.
 Decision/Rulings of the Courts.
 Office Practice reduced in Manuals and
Guidelines.
 Text Books written by Academician and
Professional Experts.
INTRODUCTION:
1. Trademarks are signs that distinguish the
goods or services of one business from others.
2. They can be visual symbols like words,
names, labels, colors, or combinations used to
identify goods or services.
3. Trademarks are protected by intellectual
property rights.
4. They promote economic efficiency by
encouraging manufacturers to invest in quality
control.
5. Without trademarks, there would be no way
for consumers to identify high or lowquality
products.
6. The Trade Marks Act, 1999 was enacted to
provide for registration of trademarks for goods
and services.
7. The Act prohibits the registration of imitation
of well-known trademarks and expands grounds
for refusal of registration.
8. Trademarks benefit both consumers and
traders by distinguishing goods and protecting
their interests.


Definitions and Interpretations
A trademark (popularly known as brand name) in
layman's language is a visual symbol which may
be a word signature, name, device, label,
numerals or combination of colours used by one
undertaking on goods or services or other
articles of commerce to distinguish it from other
similar goods or services originating from a
different undertaking.




Well Known Trade Mark - Section 2(1)(zg),
a well-known trade mark in relation to any goods
or services means a mark which has become so
to the substantial segment of the public which
uses such goods or services such that the use of
such mark in relation to other goods or services
would be likely to be taken as indicating a
connection in the course of trade or rendering of
services between those goods or services and a
person using the mark in relation to the first-
mentioned goods or services.

New Procedure for Declaring a Trademark as
"Well-Known" under the Trade Mark Rules 2017:
1. Purpose: Allows trademark owners to seek
"well-known" status for their trademarks.
2. Application: File form TM-M with the Registrar
for declaring the mark as "well-known."
3. Protection: Well-known trademarks receive
extraordinary protection against passing off and
infringement.
4. Reputation: Based on reputation nationally,
internationally, and across borders.
5. Nationwide Protection: Goodwill and
reputation protected across the entire country
and various categories of goods/services.
6. Deceptive Similarity: Restricts registration of
marks deceptively similar to a wellknown
trademark.
7. Enhanced Safeguards: Stronger safeguards
and harder to challenge in infringement/passing
off cases.
8. Recognition: Enhances prestige and
recognition of the trademark.
9. Cross-Border Protection: Extends protection
beyond national borders.
10. TM-M Application: Must meet specific criteria
and provide evidence of reputation and
recognition.
11. Exceptional Status: Sets the trademark
apart, distinguishing it as reputable and valuable.
12. Legal Advantage: Stronger position in
trademark disputes.
13. Prevents Confusion: Helps prevent
consumer confusion.
14. Promotes Brand Identity: Encourages
building strong brand identities.
15. Recognition of Global Brands: Sought by
internationally renowned brands for
multijurisdictional protection.

Permitted Use Section 2(1)(r)
Permitted use, in relation to a registered trade
mark, as to mean the use of trade mark- (i) by a
registered user of the trade mark in relation to
goods or services -
a) with which he is connected in the course of
trade; and
b) in respect of which the trade mark remains
registered for the time being; and
c) for which he is registered as registered user;
and
d) which complies with any conditions or
limitations to which the registration of registered
user is subject; or

(ii) by a person other than the registered
proprietor and registered user in relation to
goods or services
a) with which he is connected in the course of
trade; and
b) in respect of which the trade mark remains
registered for the time being; and
c) by consent of such registered proprietor in a
written agreement; and
d) which complies with any conditions or
limitations to which such user is subject and to
which the registration of the trade mark is
subject.
                                                       agreements
                                                       to squeeze
Types of Trademarks that may be Registered in          out outside
India:                                                ?bidders;
1. Any name (including personal or surname of
the applicant or predecessor in business or the
signature of the person), which is not unusual for
trade to adopt as a mark.
2. An invented word or any arbitrary dictionary
word or words, not being directly descriptive of
the character or quality of the goods/service.
3. Letters or numerals or any combination
thereof.
4. The right to proprietorship of a trademark may
be acquired by either registration under the Act
or by use in relation to particular goods or
service.
5. Devices, including fancy devices or symbols.
6. Monograms.
7. Combination of colors or even a single color in
combination with a word or device.
8. Shape of goods or their packaging.
9. Marks constituting a three dimensional sign.
10. Sound marks when represented in
conventional notation or described in words by
being graphically represented


1. Application: The person claiming to be the
proprietor of the trademark must apply in writing
to the Registrar in the prescribed manner.
2. Single Application for Multiple Classes: A
single application can be filed for registration in
multiple classes of goods or services, with the
fee based on the number of classes.
3. Examination: The Registrar examines the
application for compliance with the
requirements.
4. Publication: If the application is accepted, the
trademark is published in the Trade Marks
Journal for public notice.
5. Opposition: Any person can file an opposition
within a specified period after the publication.
6. Registration: If there is no opposition or it is
dismissed, the Registrar proceeds to register the
trademark.
7. Registration Certificate: Upon registration, the
Registrar issues a registration certificate to the
trademark owner.
8. Protection: The trademark is now protected
under the Trade Marks Act, and the owner can
enforce its rights against infringement.




Stage-wise Processing in Trade Mark
Registration:
                                                       exclusive
                                                       supply /     re
Stage-wise processing in Trade Mark                    distribution m
Registration: A. Pre-Examination Processing:          ?arrangement;?an
i. Filing of application: Trade Mark Application
filed online/offline, digitized, and merged for
processing through the Trade Mark system.
ii. VIENNA Codification: Figurative elements
codified as per VIENNA Agreement if applicable,
applications proceed for examination. B.
Examination of Applications:
 Allotment of applications for examination based
on the date of filing.
 Examination in two stages, first examination
report prepared by Examiner, then forwarded to
Examination Controller for approval.
 Examination report evaluated and approved, or
objections raised.
 Applicant must reply to office objections within
30 days, failure results in application
abandonment.
C. Post Examination Processing:
i. Consideration of Reply: Applicant submits
reply to office objections within one month.
Application allotted to authorized officers based
on date of filing of response.
ii. Show-cause hearing: If objections persist,
application moves for a show-cause hearing.
Hearing notices issued to applicant/agent based
on date of reply consideration. D. Post
Advertisement Processing:
 Accepted trademarks published in Trade Mark
Journal.
 No opposition in 4 months, mark becomes
eligible for registration.
 Registration certificate issued automatically if
no opposition or withdrawal. E. Opposition and
Rectification:
 Hearing opportunities for both parties.
 Disposal of opposition cases based on
compliance or non-compliance by parties as per
provisions of the Trade Marks Act and Rules. F.
Post Registration Trade Mark Management:
 Registered proprietor can record post
registration changes by filing a request with
prescribed fee.
 Processing post registration request and
notices to previous registered proprietors.
 Renewal requests processed based on date of
filing of the request.




                                                                   us
                                                                   do
                                                                   po
                                                                   on
                                                                   to
                                                      denying      ad
                                                      market       in
                                                     ?access, and ?m

Trade Mark Registration Workflow:
1. Pre-Application Stage:
a. Determine the type of trademark to be
registered (word, logo, combination, etc.).
b. Conduct a thorough search to ensure the
trademark is available and not already
registered.
c. Prepare the trademark application with all
necessary details and documents.
2. Filing the Application:
a. Submit the trademark application online or
offline to the Trade Mark Office.
b. Application is checked for completeness and
compliance with requirements.
3. Examination Stage:
a. Examination report is prepared by an
Examiner.
b. Application and examination report are
forwarded to the Examination Controller for
approval. objections.
specified period.
Journal.
a. Published trademark is open for opposition for
a specific period.
b. If no opposition is filed within the prescribed
period, the trademark becomes eligible for
registration.
6. Registration Stage:
a. Registration certificate is issued if no
opposition is filed or opposition is dismissed.
b. The registered trademark is valid for 10 years,
renewable indefinitely.

BENEFITS OF REGISTERING A TRADEMARK
ARE:
1. Legal Protection: Registration provides the
owner with exclusive legal rights to use the
trademark for the registered goods or services,
and it acts as evidence of ownership.
2. Brand Recognition: A registered trademark
helps create brand identity and recognition
among consumers, distinguishing the goods or
services from competitors.
3. Market Presence: A registered trademark
gives a competitive advantage in the market,
helping to build a strong brand presence and
reputation.
4. National and International Protection:
Registration offers protection not only within the
country but can also be used as a basis for
obtaining protection in other countries through
international treaties.
5. Prevents Infringement: Registering a
trademark allows the owner to take legal action
against any unauthorized use or infringement by
others.
6. Licensing and Franchising Opportunities:
Registered trademarks can be licensed or
franchised to other businesses, generating
additional revenue.
7. Asset Value: A registered trademark is
considered an intellectual property asset, and its
value can increase over time with the brand's
growth and reputation.
8. Trademark Symbol: Registered trademarks
can use the (r) symbol, which provides notice to
others about the trademark's registered status.
9. Trust and Credibility: Consumers often trust
registered trademarks more than unregistered
ones, as they indicate a commitment to quality
and authenticity.
10. Easy Enforcement: The registration helps
streamline the process of enforcing trademark
rights in case of infringement or counterfeit
products.


Section 9(1) of the Trade Marks Act contains
provisions related to absolute grounds for refusal
for trademark registration. According to this
section, the following types of trademarks shall
not be registered:
(a) Trademarks devoid of distinctive character:
Trademarks that are not capable of
distinguishing the goods or services of one
person from those of another person.
(b) Trademarks consisting exclusively of
descriptive marks: Marks or indications that may
serve to describe the kind, quality, quantity,
intended purpose, values, geographical origin, or
other characteristics of the goods or services.
(c) Trademarks consisting exclusively of
customary marks: Marks or indications that have
become customary in the current language or
bona fide and established practices of trade.
However, there is a proviso to this section that
states a trademark shall not be refused
registration if it has acquired a distinctive
character through prior use or if it is a well-known
trademark before the date of application for
registration. In such cases, the trademark may
still be eligible for registration.




Relative Grounds for Refusal of Registration
 Section 11(1) of the Trade Marks Act outlines
the absolute grounds for refusal of trademark
registration. Trademarks will not be registered if
they are identical or similar to an earlier
trademark and cover similar goods or services,
leading to a likelihood of confusion among the
public.
 Section 11(2) states that even if the goods or
services covered by the trademarks are not
similar, if the applied trademark is identical or
similar to an earlier well-known trademark in
India and its use without due cause would be
detrimental to the distinctive character or
reputation of the earlier trademark, it will not be
registered.
 Section 11(3) prohibits the registration of
trademarks that may be prevented from use in
India due to laws such as the law of passing off
or the law of copyright.
 Section 11(4) allows for the registration of a
trademark with the consent of the proprietor of
an earlier trademark or other earlier right.
 Section 11(6) defines the criteria for
determining a trademark as a well-known
trademark, considering factors such as
knowledge or recognition in the relevant section
of the public, duration, extent, and geographical
area of use and promotion, record of successful
enforcement of rights, and more.
 Section 11(7) clarifies that the Registrar shall
not require specific conditions like use in India or
registration in India for determining whether a
trademark is well-known.
 Section 11(8) ensures that the Registrar
protects a well-known trademark against
identical or similar trademarks and considers the
bad faith of the applicant or opponent during the
application and opposition process.
 Section 11(9) states that the registration of a
trademark acquired in good faith and disclosing
all material information will not be prejudiced
based on its similarity to a well-known
trademark.

Section 13 of the Trade Marks Act prohibits the
registration of certain names as trademarks:
 Names that are commonly used and accepted
names of single chemical elements or
compounds (not mixtures) in relation to a
chemical substance or preparation.
 Names declared by the World Health
Organization and notified by the Registrar as
international non-proprietary names or
deceptively similar names.
Any registration of such names as trademarks
shall be considered as an entry made in the
register without sufficient cause or an entry
wrongly remaining on the register, as per section
57 of the Act


According to the Trade Marks Act, if an
application for the registration of a trademark
falsely suggests a connection with any living
person or a person who has passed away within
twenty years prior to the application date, the
Registrar may require the applicant to provide
written consent from the living person or the
legal representative of the deceased person to
the connection depicted on the trademark. The
Registrar may refuse to proceed with the
application if the required consent is not
provided by the applicant.


Registration
 Registration of a trademark is subject to the
provisions of Section 19.
 If the application has not been opposed within
the specified time or the opposition has been
decided in favor of the applicant, the Registrar
must register the trademark within eighteen
months of the application filing date.
 The registered trademark will be considered as
of the date of the application filing.
 The Registrar will issue a certificate of
registration to the applicant, sealed with the seal
of the Trade Marks Registry.
 If the registration process is not completed
within twelve months due to the applicant's
default, the Registrar may treat the application
as abandoned after giving notice to the
applicant.
 The Registrar has the authority to amend the
register or a certificate of registration to correct
clerical errors or obvious mistakes.

Duration, Renewal, Removal and Restoration of
Registration
 Section 25 of the Act deals with the duration,
renewal, removal, and restoration of trademark
registration.
 Trademark registration is initially granted for a
period of 10 years.
 Registration can be renewed for successive
periods of 10 years from the date of the original
registration or the last renewal.
 Section 25(4) allows for the restoration of
removed trademarks on payment of the renewal
fee.

Infringement of Registered Trade Marks -
Section 29

Section 29(1) provides that a registered trade
mark is infringed by a person who, not being a
registered proprietor or a person using by way of
permitted use, uses in the course of trade, a
mark which is identical with, or deceptively
similar to, the trade mark in relation to goods or
services in respect of which the trade mark is
registered and in such manner as to render the
use of the mark likely to be taken as being used
as a trade mark.
As per section 29(2) of the Act, a registered
trade mark is infringed by a person who, not
being a registered proprietor or a person using
by way of permitted use, uses in the course of
trade, a mark which because of-
(a) its identity with the registered trade mark and
the similarity of the goods or services covered by
such registered trade mark; or
(b) its similarity to the registered trade mark and
the identity or similarity of the goods or services
covered by such registered trade mark; or
(c) its identity with the registered trade mark and
the identity of the goods or services covered by
such registered trade mark, is likely to cause
confusion on the part of the public, or is likely to
have an association with the registered trade
mark.


Section 29(3) states that in any case falling
under section 29(2)(c), the court shall presume
that it is likely to cause confusion on the part of
the public.

Section 29(4) provides that a registered trade
mark is infringed by a person who, not being a
registered proprietor or a person using by way of
permitted use, uses in the course of trade, a
mark which-
(a) is identical with or similar to the registered
trade mark; and
(b) is used in relation to goods or services which
are not similar to those for which the trade mark
is registered; and
(c) the registered trade mark has a reputation in
India and the use of the mark without due cause
takes unfair advantage of or is detrimental to, the
distinctive character or repute of the registered
trade mark.

According to Section 29(5) of the Act, a
registered trade mark is infringed by a person if
he uses such registered trade mark, as his trade
name or part of his trade name, or name of his
business concern or part of the name, of his
business concern dealing in goods or services in
respect of which the trade mark is registered.

Section 29(6) provides that a person uses a
registered mark, if, in particular, he:-
(a) affixes it to goods or the packaging thereof;
(b) offers or exposes goods for sale, puts them
on the market, or stocks them for those
purposes under the registered trade mark, or
offers or supplies services under the registered
trade mark;
(c) imports or exports goods under the mark; or
(d) uses the registered trade mark on business
papers or in advertising
Section 29(7) states that a registered trade mark
is infringed by a person who applies such
registered trade mark to a material intended to
be used for labeling or packaging goods, as a
business paper, or for advertising goods or
services, provided such person, when he applied
the mark, knew or had reason to believe that the
application of the mark was not duly authorised
by the proprietor or a licensee.

As per Section 29(8) a registered trade mark is
infringed by any advertising of that trade mark if
such advertising:-

Section 30 of the Act provides instances where
the use of a registered trademark does not
constitute infringement:
1. Use for Identifying Goods or Services: The
use of a registered trademark to identify goods
or services as those of the proprietor is permitted
if it is in accordance with honest practices in
commercial matters and does not take unfair
advantage or harm the distinctive character of
the trademark.
2. Use Indicating Characteristics: Use of a
trademark to indicate characteristics such as
kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, value,
geographical origin, time of production, or
rendering of services does not constitute
infringement.
3. Use Under Certain Conditions or Limitations: If
a trademark is registered subject to certain
conditions or limitations, its use within those
specified conditions or limitations does not
infringe the trademark rights.
4. Use by Proprietor or Registered User: The use
of a trademark by the proprietor or a registered
user in relation to goods connected with the
proprietor or user does not infringe the
trademark rights, provided the use conforms to
the permitted use.
5. Use for Goods Accessory to Other Goods:
The use of a trademark for goods that are
intended to form part of or be accessory to other
goods or services where the mark has been
used without infringement or might be so used is
not considered infringement.
6. Use of Identical or Similar Trademarks: The
use of a registered trademark, one of two or
more identical or similar trademarks registered
under the Act, does not constitute infringement if
exercised under the right given by registration

PASSING OF
 Growth in Trade and Commerce: The rapid
expansion of trade and commerce has led to an
increase in the imitation of well-known or
reputable trademarks by competitors and other
traders.
 Imitation of Trademarks: Competitors may
imitate the color scheme, get-up, or packaging of
well-known trademarks with the intention of
passing off their goods as those of the genuine
owner.
 Infringement of Registered Trademarks: In
cases of registered trademarks, the owner can
seek legal recourse for infringement under the
Trade Marks Act.
 Passing Off: For unregistered trademarks, the
Act recognizes the common law remedy of
passing off. Passing off is a legal action based
on the principle that no one is allowed to
represent their goods as those of another
person, and no one is required to use any mark
or symbol that enables a false representation to
be made to an ultimate purchaser.
 Principle of Passing Off: Passing off is based
on the principle that no one should deceive
consumers by falsely representing their goods as
those of another, thereby protecting the
reputation and goodwill associated with a
particular trademark.

Factors for Deciding Deceptive Similarity in
Passing Off Cases:
1. Nature of Marks: Consider whether the marks
are word marks, label marks, or composite
marks (both words and labels).
2. Resemblance: Evaluate the degree of
similarity between the marks, including phonetic
similarity and similarity in idea.
3. Nature of Goods: Examine the nature of the
goods for which the marks are used as
trademarks.
4. Similarity of Goods: Assess the similarity in
nature, character, and performance of the goods
offered by rival traders.
5. Class of Purchasers: Consider the class of
purchasers who are likely to buy the goods
bearing the marks, their education, intelligence,
and degree of care exercised in purchasing or
using the goods.
6. Mode of Purchasing: Analyze the mode of
purchasing the goods or placing orders for the
goods.
7. Surrounding Circumstances: Take into
account any other relevant surrounding
circumstances that may indicate dissimilarity
between the competing marks.
 Weightage: Assign weightage to each factor
based on the facts of the individual case,
recognizing that the same weightage cannot be
given to each factor in every case.

Assignment and Transmission
 Section 37: Allows the registered proprietor of a
trademark to assign the trademark and give
receipts for consideration received in such
assignments.
 Section 38: Deals with the assignability and
transmissibility of a registered trademark with or
without goodwill of the business, either in respect
of all goods or services or a part thereof.
 Section 39: Permits the assignment or
transmission of an unregistered trademark with
or without the goodwill of the business
concerned.
 Section 40: Contains restrictions on
assignments or transmissions of trademarks that
could create multiple exclusive rights in different
persons for the same or similar goods/services,
which may cause confusion or deception.
 Section 42: Outlines conditions for the
assignment of a trademark without the goodwill
of the business, requiring directions from the
Registrar and advertising the assignment
accordingly.
 Section 43: States that certification trade marks
can only be assigned with the consent of the
Registrar.
 Section 44: Allows associated trademarks to be
assignable and transmissible only as a whole,
but they will be treated as separate trademarks
for all other purposes.
 Section 45: Specifies the procedure for
registration of assignments and transmissions,
requiring the Registrar to refuse registration if
the validity of an assignment is in dispute
between the parties unless determined by a
competent court.




Appointment of Registrar and Trade Mark
Registry
 Section 3: Deals with the appointment of the
Registrar and other officers responsible for the
administration of trademark matters.
 Section 4: Empowers the Registrar to withdraw
any pending matter before an officer and handle
it personally or transfer it to another officer, with
proper reasons recorded for such transfer.
 Section 5: Establishes the Trade Marks
Registry and its branch offices, clarifying that the
existing Trade Marks Registry under the Trade
and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 will continue
to function as the Trade Marks Registry for the
purposes of the Trade Marks Act.

Trade Mark Agent
Section 145 of the Trade Marks Act deals with
agents and their role in performing acts required
before the Registrar. The section allows the
following persons to act as authorized agents on
behalf of the principal:
(a) Legal Practitioner: A qualified lawyer or
attorney can act as an agent.
(b) Registered Trade Marks Agent: A person
registered in the prescribed manner as a trade
marks agent can act on behalf of the principal.
(c) Employee of the Principal: A person who is in
the sole and regular employment of the principal
can also act as an agent.

a person shall be qualified to be registered as a
trademarks agent if he-

(i) is a citizen of India,
(ii) is not less than 21 years of age;
(iii) is a graduate of any university in India or
possesses an equivalent qualification and has
passed the examination prescribed in rule 148 or
is an Advocate within the meaning of the
Advocates Act, 1961 or is a member of the
Institute of Company Secretaries of India; (iv) is
considered by the Registrar as a fit and proper
person to be registered as a trademark agent


Lesson 18: Law relating to Copyright
INTRODUCTION:
1. Copyright is a well-recognized form of property
right with its roots in the common law system.
2. It grants the exclusive right to authors to copy
their literary or artistic works and prevent others
from doing so.
3. Copyright protection has expanded with
technological advancements, covering various
forms of creativity.
4. In India, the Copyright Act, 1957 governs
copyright law, and it has undergone several
amendments.
5. Copyright law covers literary, music, software,
graphics, choreography, movies, and more.
6. It protects the work of creators regardless of
content or quality.
7. Although registration is not mandatory, it is
advisable to register the work to secure
copyright protection.
8. Copyright (or author's right) is a legal term
used to describe the rights that creators have
over their literary and artistic works. Works
covered by copyright range from books, music,
paintings, sculpture, and films, to computer
programs, databases, advertisements, maps,
and technical drawings
9. The object of copyright is to protect and
reward authors' labor on their created work.
10. Copyright protects the "type of material
communication," not individual concepts, ideas,
techniques, or details.
11. Copyright protection requires the work to be
set in a physical form, such as stories written on
paper or initial canvas paintings.
12. Copyright protects various forms of work,
including song lyrics, books, images, computer
programs, etc.
13. Copyright does not protect ideas, titles,
names, or details.
14. Publishing is important as it grants the
author exclusive rights to replicate, create
derivative works, distribute, sell, and publicly
perform their copyrighted works.
15. The author can grant these rights as a
package or separately, which can help generate
income if others reproduce the work.

Adaptation means,-
(i) in relation to a dramatic work, the conversion
of the work into a non-dramatic work; (ii) in
relation to a literary work or an artistic work, the
conversion of the work into a dramatic work by
way of performance in public or otherwise;
(iii) in relation to a literary or dramatic work, any
abridgement of the work or any version of the
work in which the story or action is conveyed
wholly or mainly by means of pictures in a form
suitable for reproduction in a book, or in a
newspaper, magazine or similar periodical; (iv) in
relation to a musical work, any arrangement or
transcription of the work; and
(v) in relation to any work, any use of such work
involving its re-arrangement or alteration


Author means,-
(i) in relation to a literary or dramatic work, the
author of the work;
(ii) in relation to a musical work, the composer;
(iii) in relation to an artistic work other than a
photograph, the artist;
(iv) in relation to a photograph, the person taking
the photograph;
(v) in relation to a cinematograph or sound
recording the producer; and
(vi) in relation to any literary, dramatic, musical
or artistic work which is computer-generated, the
person who causes the work to be created;

Works in which Copyright Subsists
 Copyright shall subsist throughout India in
original literary, dramatic, musical, and artistic
works, cinematograph films, and sound
recordings (Section 13(1)).
 Copyright will not subsist in any work specified
in Section 13(1) unless certain conditions are
met, such as the work being first published in
India or the author being a citizen of India or
domiciled in India at the time of making the work
(Section 13(2)).
 Copyright will not subsist in a cinematograph
film if a substantial part of the film infringes the
copyright of any other work, and the same
applies to sound recordings made in respect of
literary, dramatic, or musical works (Section
13(3)).
 The copyright in a cinematograph film or sound
recording will not affect the separate copyright in
any work in respect of which the film or sound
recording is made.
 In the case of a work of architecture, copyright
shall subsist only in the artistic character and
design and not extend to processes or methods
of construction.
 The term "work" includes literary, dramatic,
musical, or artistic works, cinematograph films,
and sound recordings.




Section 14 of the Act defines the term Copyright
as to mean the exclusive right to do or authorise
the doing of the following acts in respect of a
work or any substantial part thereof, namely:

(a) Copyright in the case of a Literary, Dramatic
or Musical Work, not being a Computer
Programme
(i) to reproduce the work in any material form
including the storing of it in any medium by
electronic means;
(ii) to issue copies of the work to the public not
being copies already in circulation;
(iii) to perform the work in public, or
communicate it to the public;
(iv) to make any cinematograph film or sound
recording in respect of the work;
(v) to make any translation of the work;
(vi) to make any adaptation of the work; (vii) to
do, in relation to a translation or an adaptation of
the work, any of the acts specified in relation to
the work in sub-clauses
(i) to (vi)

(b) Copyright in the case of a Computer
Programme
(i) to do any of the acts specified in specified in
respect of a literary, dramatic or musical work;
(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer
for sale or for commercial rental any copy of the
computer programmer:
Provided that such commercial rental does not
apply in respect of computer programmes where
the programme itself is not the essential object
of the rental.

(c) Copyright in the case of an Artistic Work
(A) the storing of it in any medium by electronic
or other means; or
(B) depiction in three-dimensions of a two-
dimensional work; or
(C) depiction in two-dimensions of a three-
dimensional work.

(d) Copyright in the case of a Cinematograph
Film (i) to make a copy of the film, including-
(A) a photograph of any image forming part
thereof; or
(B) storing of it in any medium by electronic or
other means.
(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer
for sale or for such rental, any copy of the film.
(iii) to communicate the film to the public.

(e) Copyright in the case of a Sound Recording
(i) to make any other sound recording
embodying it including storing of it in any
medium by electronic or other means;
(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer
for sale or for such rental, any copy of the sound
recording;
(iii) to communicate the sound recording to the
public. It may be noted that a copy which has
been sold once shall be deemed to be a copy
already in circulation

Term of copyright for different types of works
under the Copyright Act:
1. Published Literary, Dramatic, Musical, and
Artistic Works:
 Copyright lasts until sixty years from the
beginning of the calendar year next following the
year in which the author dies.
 In the case of joint authorship, copyright lasts
until sixty years from the death of the last
surviving author.
2. Anonymous and Pseudonymous Works:
 Copyright lasts until sixty years from the
beginning of the calendar year next following the
year in which the work is first published.
 If the identity of the author is disclosed before
the expiry of the said period, copyright lasts until
sixty years from the beginning of the calendar
year next following the year of the author's
death.
3. Posthumous Works:
 Copyright lasts until sixty years from the
beginning of the calendar year next following the
year in which the work is first published or, if an
adaptation is published earlier, from the
beginning of the calendar year next following that
year.
4. Cinematograph Films:
 Copyright lasts until sixty years from the
beginning of the calendar year next following the
year in which the film is published.
5. Sound Recordings:
 Copyright lasts until sixty years from the
beginning of the calendar year next following the
year in which the sound recording is published.
Summary of the term of copyright for
government works, works of public undertakings,
and works of international organizations:
6. Government Works:
 Copyright lasts until sixty years from the
beginning of the calendar year next following the
year in which the work is first published.
 Government is the first owner of the copyright
in government works.
7. Works of Public Undertakings:
 Copyright lasts until sixty years from the
beginning of the calendar year next following the
year in which the work is first published.
 Public undertakings are the first owners of the
copyright in works created by them.
8. Works of International Organizations:
 Copyright lasts until sixty years from the
beginning of the calendar year next following the
year in which the work is first published.
 Applies to works of international organizations
to which the provisions of section 41 of the
Copyright Act apply.

ASSIGNMENT OF COPYRIGHT
1. Assignment of Copyright:
 The owner of the copyright in an existing work
or the prospective owner of the copyright in a
future work can assign the copyright to any
person.
 The assignment can be either wholly or
partially, and either generally or subject to
limitations.
 It can be for the whole term of the copyright or
any part thereof.
 In the case of assignment of copyright in a
future work, the assignment takes effect only
when the work comes into existence.
2. Limitations on Assignment:
 No assignment shall be applicable to any
medium or mode of exploitation of the work that
did not exist or was not in commercial use at the
time of the assignment, unless specifically
mentioned.
 The author of the literary or musical work
included in a cinematograph film cannot assign
or waive the right to receive royalties, except for
the communication to the public of the work
along with the film in a cinema hall, and this right
must be shared equally with the assignee of
copyright.
 The author of the literary or musical work
included in a sound recording (not part of a
cinematograph film) cannot assign or waive the
right to receive royalties for any utilization of the
work, except for certain exceptions like
distribution to legal heirs or collecting society.
3. Legal Representatives of Assignee:
 The assignee of copyright in any future work
includes the legal representatives of the
assignee, in case the assignee dies before the
work comes into existence.

Mode of Assignment
1. Written Assignment: The assignment of
copyright in any work must be in writing and
signed by the assignor or their duly authorized
agent.
2. Details in Assignment: The assignment should
clearly identify the work, specify the rights being
assigned, mention the duration and territorial
extent of the assignment, state the amount of
royalty or consideration payable to the author or
their legal heirs during the assignment, and
include provisions for revision, extension, or
termination of the assignment.
3. Lapsed Assignment: If the assignee does not
exercise the assigned rights within one year from
the date of assignment, the assignment for those
rights will be deemed to have lapsed, unless
otherwise specified in the assignment.
4. Void Assignment: An assignment of copyright
in a work that contravenes the terms and
conditions of rights already assigned to a
copyright society, of which the author is a
member, is void.
5. Author's Right in Cinematograph Films: The
assignment of copyright in a work to make a
cinematograph film does not affect the right of
the author to claim an equal share of royalties
and consideration for utilization of the work in
any form other than for public communication
with the film in a cinema hall.
LICENCES
 The owner of the copyright in any existing work
or the prospective owner of copyright in any
future work has the exclusive right to grant
licenses with respect to their creative work.
 The grant of license must be in writing and can
be done by the copyright owner or their duly
authorized agent.
 In the case of a license relating to copyright in
any future work, the license will only take effect
when the work comes into existence.
 If a person to whom a license for copyright in a
future work is granted dies before the work
comes into existence, their legal representatives
will be entitled to the benefit of the license,
unless otherwise specified in the license
agreement.
Compulsory Licence in Unpublished or
Published Works
 Section 31A allows any person to apply to the
Commercial Court for a license to publish or
communicate to the public an unpublished work
or a work that is withheld from the public in India,
if the author is dead, unknown, or cannot be
traced, or the owner of the copyright cannot be
found.
 Before making the application, the applicant
must publish their proposal in a daily newspaper
in English and, if applicable, in the language of
the proposed translation.
 The application must be made in the
prescribed form and accompanied by the
prescribed fee.
 The Commercial Court, after holding an inquiry,
may direct the Registrar of Copyrights to grant a
license to the applicant, subject to the payment
of royalty and other terms and conditions
determined by the court.
 The applicant may be required to deposit the
royalty amount determined by the court in a
specified account.
 If the original author is deceased and the
publication of the work is in the national interest,
the Central Government may require the author's
heirs, executors, or legal representatives to
publish the work within a specified period.
 If the work is not published within the specified
period, the Commercial Court may permit its
publication on payment of royalty as determined
by the court, after hearing the parties concerned

Section 32B: Termination of translation licences.
 If a translation licence is granted, and the
copyright owner or an authorized person
publishes a translation of the same work in the
same language and substantially the same
content at a reasonable price, the licence is
terminated.
 Termination takes effect after three months
from serving notice to the licensee.


The Copyright Act allows for the registration of
copyright societies. Copyright societies are
organizations established to manage and
administer copyright on behalf of creators and
copyright owners. Here are the key points
related to the registration of copyright societies:
1. Establishment: Copyright societies are
established under Section 33 of the Copyright
Act, 1957.
2. Functions: The primary function of copyright
societies is to administer the rights of creators
and copyright owners, including the collection
and distribution of royalties for the use of
copyrighted works.
3. Application for Registration: A copyright
society seeking registration must make an
application to the Central Government in the
prescribed form.
4. Criteria for Registration: The Central
Government, after examining the application,
may grant registration if it is satisfied that the
society is competent to fulfill its functions and is
not likely to violate copyright or engage in unfair
practices.
5. Terms and Conditions: The registration of a
copyright society is subject to terms and
conditions prescribed by the Central
Government.
6. Registration as a Licensing Body: Once
registered, the copyright society becomes a
licensing body authorized to issue licenses for
the use of copyrighted works and collect
royalties on behalf of the copyright owners.
7. Cancellation of Registration: The Central
Government has the power to cancel the
registration of a copyright society if it fails to
comply with the prescribed conditions or is found
to have violated the copyright law.
8. Transparency and Accountability: Copyright
societies are required to maintain transparency
in their operations and are subject to regulatory
oversight to ensure fair management of
copyright-related matters.

Section 37 of the Copyright Act grants
broadcasting organizations a special right known
as the "broadcast reproduction right" for their
broadcasts. Here are the key points related to
the broadcast reproduction right:
1. Broadcasting Organization's Right: Section 37
gives every broadcasting organization the
exclusive right to be known as the "broadcast
reproduction right" for its broadcasts.
2. Duration of the Right: The broadcast
reproduction right subsists for a period of
twentyfive years from the beginning of the
calendar year next following the year in which the
broadcast is made.
3. Activities Covered: During the continuance of
the broadcast reproduction right, certain
activities related to the broadcast are restricted,
including re-broadcasting, causing the broadcast
to be heard or seen by the public for payment,
making sound or visual recordings of the
broadcast, and reproducing such recordings.
4. Licensing: To perform the restricted activities,
a person must obtain a license from the
broadcasting organization, and any unlicensed
activity or use beyond the scope of the license is
prohibited.
Overall, the broadcast reproduction right grants
broadcasting organizations the exclusive control
over certain activities related to their broadcasts
for a specific period, ensuring that their works
are protected and fairly used


Performer's Right:
 Section 38 of the Copyright Act grants
performers a special right known as the
"performer's right" in relation to their
performances.
 The performer's right subsists for a period of
fifty years from the beginning of the calendar
year next following the year in which the
performance is made.
 Section 38A provides performers with an
exclusive right to control certain acts in relation
to their performances, including making sound or
visual recordings, issuing copies, communicating
to the public, selling or renting copies, and
broadcasting or communicating the performance
to the public.
 Performers also have moral rights, which
include the right to be identified as the performer
of their performance and the right to prevent any
distortion, mutilation, or modification of their
performance that may harm their reputation.

Copyright Protection to Foreign Works
Copyright protection to foreign works in India is
governed by the provisions of the Copyright Act,
1957. The Act provides certain protections and
rights to foreign authors and creators, as well as
works that originate from foreign countries.
Key provisions related to copyright protection to
foreign works in India:
1. Berne Convention: India is a member of the
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary
and Artistic Works. As a result, works originating
in any member country of the Berne Convention
are given the same copyright protection in India
as works created by Indian authors.
2. International Copyright Relations: India has
also signed various international agreements and
treaties, such as the Universal Copyright
Convention (UCC) and the Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS)
Agreement under the World Trade Organization
(WTO), which provide additional protections to
foreign works in India.
3. No Formalities: Foreign works are granted
copyright protection in India without the need for
any formalities or registration. As soon as a work
is created and qualifies for copyright protection,
it is automatically protected.
4. Duration of Copyright: The duration of
copyright protection for foreign works in India is
typically the same as for works created by Indian
authors. For literary, dramatic, musical, and
artistic works, copyright generally subsists for the
lifetime of the author plus 60 years from the
beginning of the calendar year following the
author's death.
5. Enforcement: Foreign authors and copyright
owners have the same rights to enforce their
copyrights in India as Indian authors. They can
take legal action against copyright infringement
and seek remedies in Indian courts.
Overall, India provides adequate copyright
protection to foreign works, and copyright
owners from other countries can avail
themselves of the same rights and remedies as
Indian authors and creators in protecting their
intellectual property.




The key points related to copyright registration
are as follows:
1. Not Compulsory: Copyright registration is not
compulsory, and an author can still bring an
action for copyright infringement even without
registration.
2. Enabling Provisions: Sections 44 and 45 of
the Act are enabling provisions, allowing authors
or owners of copyrighted works to apply for
registration voluntarily.
3. Prima Facie Evidence: Copyright registration
serves as prima facie evidence of the particulars
entered in the copyright register.
4. Application Process: To apply for copyright
registration, the author or owner of the work
needs to submit an application in the prescribed
form to the Registrar of Copyrights along with
the prescribed fee.
5. Optional Artistic Work Declaration: If an artistic
work is used or capable of being used in relation
to goods or services, the application should
include a statement to that effect, accompanied
by a certificate from the Registrar of Trade
Marks.
6. Registrar's Discretion: The Registrar of
Copyrights may conduct an inquiry and decide
whether to enter the particulars of the work in the
Copyright Register.

The procedure for copyright registration in India
is outlined below:
Step 1: Application Form The applicant (author,
owner, or publisher) needs to fill out the
appropriate application form prescribed under
the Copyright Rules, 2013. The application
forms can be downloaded from the official
website of the Copyright Office.
Step 2: Supporting Documents The application
must be accompanied by the following
documents:
 A copy of the work being registered (in case of
unpublished works, two copies are required).
 A statement of particulars and statement of
further particulars, as required for the specific
category of work (literary, artistic, musical, etc.).
 If applicable, a No Objection Certificate (NOC)
from the author or other copyright owner, in case
the applicant is not the author or original
copyright holder.
Step 3: Fee Payment The prescribed fee must
be paid along with the application. The fee varies
based on the type of work and mode of filing
(online or physical submission). Step 4:
Submission The completed application form and
supporting documents can be submitted
physically at the Copyright Office or filed online
through the official website of the Copyright
Office.
Step 5: Examination Upon receipt of the
application, the Copyright Office will examine the
application for completeness and accuracy of
the details provided.
Step 6: Copyright Registration If the application
is found to be in order, the Copyright Office will
process the registration and enter the particulars
of the work in the Copyright Register.
The copyright certificate will be issued to the
applicant.
Step 7: Copyright Term Copyright protection
lasts for the lifetime of the author plus an
additional 60 years after the author's death in
most cases.


INFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT
1. Section 51(a): Copyright infringement occurs
when a person:
 Does anything that the copyright owner has the
exclusive right to do under the Act, without a
license granted by the owner or Registrar of
Copyrights.
 Permits, for profit, any place to be used for
communicating the work to the public in a way
that infringes the copyright, unless the person
was unaware and had no reasonable grounds to
believe it would be an infringement.
2. Section 51(b): Copyright infringement occurs
when a person:

 Makes, sells, rents, displays, offers for sale or
hire, or distributes the work without authorization,
affecting the copyright owner prejudicially.
 Exhibits the work in public by way of trade
without authorization.
 Imports into India any infringing copies of the
work, except when importing one copy for
private and domestic use.
3. "Infringing copy": Refers to unauthorized
reproductions of various types of works, such as
literary, dramatic, musical, or artistic works,
cinematographic films, sound recordings, and
performances. It includes copies made in
violation of the Act's provisions.
4. Explanation: The reproduction of a literary,
dramatic, musical, or artistic work in the form of a
cinematographic film is considered an "infringing
copy" for the purpose of
Section 51.

Statutory Exceptions-Certain acts not to be
Infringement of Copyright
The Copyright Act provides certain statutory
exceptions where certain acts are not
considered infringement of copyright. These
exceptions are outlined in Section 52 of the Act.
Here are the key statutory exceptions:
1. Fair dealing for private or personal use,
including research or study: It allows individuals
to use copyrighted material for private purposes
like research, study, criticism, or review without
obtaining permission from the copyright owner.
2. Criticism, review, or news reporting: Allows for
the use of copyrighted material in news
reporting, criticism, or review, as long as it is
done in a fair manner and with proper
acknowledgment.
3. Reporting of current events: Allows for the use
of copyrighted material in news reports of current
events, provided that the source is
acknowledged.
4. Reproduction for judicial proceedings or for
legislation: Allows for the reproduction of
copyrighted material in judicial proceedings or
legislation without infringing copyright. 5.
Performance by an amateur club or society:
Permits amateur clubs or societies to perform
copyrighted works without infringing copyright.
6. Reproduction for the purpose of judicial
proceedings: Allows for the reproduction of
copyrighted material for judicial proceedings
without infringing copyright.
7. Public libraries and educational institutions:
Allows public libraries and educational
institutions to make copies of copyrighted works
for educational purposes.
8. Reproduction by the Central or State
Governments: Allows the Central and State
Governments to reproduce copyrighted material
for official purposes.

Remedies against Infringement of Copyright
1. Injunction: Stop further infringement.
2. Damages: Claim financial losses and profits
gained by the infringer.
3. Accounts and Delivery Up: Provide accounts
of profits and surrender infringing copies.
4. Seizure and Detention: Seize infringing copies
to prevent distribution.
5. Statutory License Fees: Pay fees for
unauthorized use.
6. Criminal Proceedings: File a complaint for
fines and imprisonment.
7. Online Takedown: Issue takedown notices to
remove infringing content.
8. Border Measures: Detain and seize infringing
copies at borders. Prompt action is essential to
protect copyright..

Offences and Penalties under the Copyright Act
include:
1. Infringement of Copyright: Imprisonment for a
term not less than 6 months, extendable up to 3
years, and/or a fine between Rs. 50,000 to Rs.
2,00,000.
2. Making or Importing Infringing Copies:
Imprisonment for a term not less than 6 months,
extendable up to 3 years, and/or a fine between
Rs. 50,000 to Rs. 2,00,000.
3. Circumventing Technological Protection
Measures: Imprisonment for a term not less than
6 months, extendable up to 3 years, and/or a fine
between Rs. 50,000 to Rs.
2,00,000.
4. Using Pirated Copies for Profit: Imprisonment
for a term not less than 7 days, extendable up to
3 years, and/or a fine between Rs. 50,000 to Rs.
2,00,000.
5. Selling or Possessing Infringing Copies for
Trade: Imprisonment for a term not less than 6
months, extendable up to 3 years, and/or a fine
between Rs. 50,000 to Rs.
2,00,000.
6. Making False Entries: Imprisonment for a term
not less than 6 months, extendable up to 3
years, and/or a fine between Rs. 50,000 to Rs.
2,00,000.
7. Failure to Deliver Books: Fine up to Rs.
25,000.
8. Publishing or Performing Infringing Work in
Public Places: Fine up to Rs. 50,000.




Lesson 19: Law relating to Geographical
Indications of Goods
INTRODUCTION:
 Geographical Indications (GI) are marks that
identify products as originating from a specific
region, guaranteeing quality and uniqueness due
to their origin.
 GI protection prevents counterfeit products
from tarnishing the reputation of genuine goods
and benefits both producers and consumers.
 Regions specializing in unique products like
silk, cotton, and spices gained global
recognition, linking product qualities to their
geographical locality.
 GI concept has evolved over centuries,
reflecting traditional expertise passed down
through generations.
 GI falls under the TRIPS Agreement, part of the
WTO, and includes indications identifying goods
originating from a specific country, region, or
locality, with specific qualities attributed to their
geographical origin.
 India enacted a sui generis legislation in 1999
to protect GI after joining the TRIPS Agreement.
Geographical Indication
* Geographical Indication (GI) in relation to
goods identifies agricultural, natural, or
manufactured products as originating from a
specific territory, region, or locality.
* It signifies that the quality, reputation, or other
characteristic of the goods is essentially linked to
their geographical origin.
* For manufactured goods, at least one of the
production, processing, or preparation activities
must occur in the specified territory.
* The name need not be the name of a country,
region, or locality; it can also be a specific
geographical area related to the goods.

* GI protection ensures that the unique qualities
and reputation of goods from a particular region
are preserved and distinguished from imitations
or counterfeit products.

 It is an indication.
 It originates from a definite geographical
territory.
 It is used to identify agricultural, natural or
manufactured goods.
 The manufactured goods should be produced
or processed or prepared in that territory.
 It should have a special quality or reputation or
other characteristics.
It may be noted that: Goods means any
agricultural, natural or manufactured goods or
any goods of handicraft or of industry and
includes food stuff. Indication includes any
name, geographical or figurative representation
or any combination of them conveying or
suggesting the geographical origin of goods to
which it applies.

Prohibition of Registration of Certain
Geographical Indications
Section 9 of the Act prohibits registration of
certain geographical indications. They are as
follows:-
(a) the use of which would be likely to deceive or
cause confusion; or
(b) the use of which would be contrary to any law
for the time being in force; or
(c) which comprises or contains scandalous or
obscene matter; or
(d) which comprises or contains any matter likely
to hurt the religious susceptibilities of any class
or section of the citizens of India; or
(e) which would otherwise be disentitled to
protection in a court; or
(f) which are determined to be generic names or
indications of goods and are, therefore, not or
ceased to be protected in their country of origin,
or which have fallen into disuse in that country;
or
(g) which, although literally true as to the
territory, region or locality in which the goods
originate, but falsely represent to the persons
that the goods originate in another territory,
region or locality, as the case may be;

Geographical Indication of Goods - Registration
Process
1. File the application: The association
representing the producers of the concerned
goods files the application for Geographical
Indication (GI) registration.
2. Preliminary Scrutiny and Examination: The
application is scrutinized for any deficiencies or
errors. The content of the statement of case is
assessed by a group of experts.
3. Show Cause Notice: If there are objections to
the application, the Registrar issues a show
cause notice. The applicant must respond or
request a hearing.
4. Publication in the Geographical Indications
Journal: The accepted application is published in
the Geographical Indications Journal.
5. Opposition to Registration: Any person can file
a notice of opposition within three months of
publication, opposing the GI application. Both
sides provide evidence and a hearing is
conducted.
6. Registration: If the application is accepted and
no opposition is successful, the GI is registered,
and a certificate is issued.

7. Renewal: The registered GI is valid for 10
years and can be renewed by paying the
renewal fee.
8. Additional Protection to Notified Goods:
Additional protection is provided for notified
goods under the Act.
9. Appeal: Any person aggrieved by an order or
decision can prefer an appeal.

Infringement of Registered Geographical
Indications
Infringement of a registered Geographical
Indication (GI) occurs when a person uses the GI
or a deceptively similar indication without proper
authorization, thereby misleading the public
about the true origin of the goods or services.
Section 22 of the Geographical Indications of
Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999
deals with the infringement of a registered GI.
According to Section 22, the following actions
shall be deemed as infringement of a registered
GI:
1. The use of a GI by any person in the course of
trade for goods or services which are not
originating from the geographical area indicated
by the registered GI, in a manner that misleads
the public about the true origin of such goods or
services.
2. Any use of a GI that constitutes an unfair trade
practice, taking unfair advantage of the
reputation of the registered GI.
3. Any use of a GI that causes detriment to the
registered GI's distinctive character, reputation,
or quality.
In case of infringement, the registered proprietor
of the GI or any authorized person may file a civil
suit in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking
remedies such as injunctions, damages, or
account of profits. The Act also provides for
criminal penalties for willful infringement of a
registered GI, which includes imprisonment and
fine.


Meaning of Applying Geographical Indications
Section 37 of the Act provides that a person
shall be deemed to apply a geographical
indication to goods who:
(a) applies it to the goods themselves; or
(b) applies it to any package in or with which the
goods are sold, or exposed for sale, or had in
possession for sale or for any purpose of trade
or manufacture; or
(c) places, encloses or annexes any goods which
are sold, or exposed for sale, or had in
possession for sale or for any purpose of trade
or manufacture, in or with any package or other
thing to which a geographical indication has been
applied; or
(d) uses a geographical indication in any manner
reasonably likely to lead to the belief that the
goods in connection with which it is used are
designated or described by that geographical
indication; or
(e) in relation to the goods uses a geographical
indication in any sign, advertisement, invoice,
catalogue, business letter, business paper, price
list or other commercial documents and goods
are delivered to a person in pursuance of a
request or order made by reference to the
geographical indication as so used.
A geographical indication shall be deemed to be
applied to goods whether it is woven in,
impressed on, or otherwise worked into, or
annexed or affixed to, the goods or to any
package or other thing

Falsifying and Falsely Applying Geographical
Indications
Section 38 states that a person shall be deemed
to falsify a geographical indication who, either:
(a) without the assent of the authorised user of
the geographical indication makes that
geographical indication or deceptively similar
geographical indication; or
(b) falsifies any genuine geographical indication,
whether by alteration, addition, effacement or
otherwise.

A person shall be deemed to falsely apply to
goods a geographical indication who, without the
assent of the authorised user of the geographical
indication:
(a) applies such geographical indication or a
deceptively similar geographical indication to
goods or any package containing goods;
(b) uses any package bearing a geographical
indication which is identical with or deceptively
similar to the geographical indication of such
authorised user, for the purpose of packing,
filling or wrapping therein any goods other than
the genuine goods of the authorised user of the
geographical indication.
Any geographical indication falsified or falsely
applied referred to as a false geographical
indication.

Penalty for Applying False Geographical
Indications
Section 103 of the Act deals with the penalty for
applying false geographical indications. If any
person applies a false geographical indication to
any goods or provides any false information that
a geographical indication has been registered,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to two years or with a
fine which may extend to Rs. 50,000, or with
both.

Lesson 20: Law relating to Designs
INTRODUCTION:
- Industrial designs pertain to the ornamental or
formal appearance of a product.
- Design right protects novel or original designs
granted to the registered proprietor.
- The Designs Act, 2000 governs the protection
of industrial designs in India.
- It replaced the Patents and Designs Act, 1911,
to comply with TRIPS after India joined the WTO
in 1995.
- The objective is to safeguard new or original
designs applied to specific articles made through
industrial processes.
- Registration ensures creators of aesthetically
pleasing designs are rewarded and their rights
are protected.
- The law prohibits registration of designs that
are not new, original, or significantly
distinguishable from known designs.
- The Designs Act aims to strike a balance
between encouraging innovation and protecting
the rights of designers.

Summary of Supreme Court's observation in the
case of Bharat Glass Tube Limited vs. Gopal
Glass Works Limited:
 The Designs Act, 2000 was introduced to
replace the outdated Designs Act of 1911 to
protect industrial designs.
 The purpose of the Act is to promote design
activity and protect intellectual property rights of
original designs.
 The Act ensures protection for a period of ten
years for new and original designs that have not
been previously registered or published.
 The Act prohibits registration of designs that
are not new, original, or significantly
distinguishable from known designs.
 Designs that have been disclosed to the public
or are not registerable under the Act are not
eligible for registration.
 The Act provides for cancellation of registration
if a design does not meet the criteria or has been
previously registered or published.
 The sole aim of the Act is to safeguard the
rights of designers who have put in research and
labor to create new and original designs.
 Designs that meet the requirements of the Act
are granted protection for a period of ten years.
 The Act aims to strike a balance between
protecting intellectual property rights and
promoting free use of available designs.
Design
 Design refers to the features of shape,
configuration, pattern, ornament, or composition
of lines or color applied to any article.
 It can be two-dimensional or three-dimensional
or a combination of both.
 The design should be applied to the article by
any industrial process or means, whether
manual, mechanical, or chemical.
 The design should appeal to and be judged
solely by the eye in the finished article.
 Designs that are mere mechanical devices,
trade marks, property marks, or artistic works as
defined under other acts are not considered as
designs under this section. An artistic work as
defined under Section 2(c) of the Copyright Act,
1957 is not a subject matter for registration
which reads as follows: "Artistic works" means: -
A painting, a sculpture, a drawing (including a
diagram, map, chart or plan) on engraving or a
photograph, whether or not such work
possesses artistic quality;
An work of architecture; and
Any other work of artistic craftsmanship.
A design or pattern covers the whole body or the
goods and forms part and parcel or the goods
but a trade mark is apart from and different from
the goods for denoting the goods to be the
manufacture or merchandise of a particular
person. The copying of a design cannot,
therefore, be treated as counterfeiting a trade
mark

Article means any article of manufacture and any
substance, artificial, or partly artificial and partly
natural; and includes any part of an article
capable of being made and sold separately

Proprietor of a New or Original Design
 In cases where the author of the design
executes the work for someone else for good
consideration, the person for whom the design is
executed is considered as the proprietor of the
design.
 If any person acquires the design or the right to
apply the design to any article exclusively or
otherwise, that person is considered the
proprietor of the design to the extent of the
acquisition.
 In any other case, the author of the design is
considered the proprietor.
 If the property in or the right to apply the design
is transferred from the original proprietor to
another person, that person is also included as
the proprietor of the design.


Prohibition of Registration of Certain Designs
A design which prohibited of registration under
Section 4 of the Design Act, 2000 are as follows:
 is not new or original; or
 has been disclosed to the public anywhere in
India or in any other country by publication in
tangible form or by use or in any other way prior
to the filing date, or where applicable, the priority
date of the application for registration; or
 is not significantly distinguishable from known
designs or combination of known designs; or
 comprises or contains scandalous or obscene
matter, shall not be registered.

Application for Registration of Designs (Section
5)
Section 5 of the Designs Act deals with the
application for registration of designs. Here are
the key points related to the application process:
1. Application Filing: Any person claiming to be
the proprietor of a new or original design may
apply for its registration by submitting an
application to the Controller of Designs. 2.
Contents of Application: The application must
contain the prescribed information and
representations or drawings of the design.
3. Priority Date: The date of application shall be
the priority date for the registration of the design.
4. Multiple Designs: An application may relate to
one or more designs if they belong to the same
class of articles.
5. Examination: The Controller will examine the
application to ensure it complies with the
requirements and may request additional
information or amendments if needed.
6. Publication: After examination, the Controller
will publish the application in the Official Journal,
and it will be open for public inspection.
7. Opposition: Within four months of the
publication, any person may oppose the
registration of the design by filing a notice of
opposition with the Controller.
8. Registration: If there is no opposition or the
opposition is resolved in favor of the applicant,
the Controller will register the design and issue a
certificate of registration. The application
process for registration of designs aims to
protect new and original designs from being
copied or used by others without permission,
providing exclusive rights to the proprietor of the
design.




Publication of Particulars of Registered Designs
Section 7 of the Act provides that the Controller
shall, as soon as may be after the registration of
a design, cause publication of the prescribed
particulars of the design to be published in such
manner as may be prescribed and thereafter the
design shall be open to public inspection.

Substitution of Applicant or Joint Claiming
(Section 8)
 The original applicant for a design registration
can be substituted by any other person who
claims to be the proprietor of the design.
 The Controller of Designs has the authority to
allow such substitution upon application and
payment of the prescribed fee.
 The Controller may also allow for joint claiming
of the design by multiple persons if they claim to
be joint proprietors.
 The joint claimants must apply together and
submit their request for joint claiming along with
the prescribed fee.
 The Controller will record the substitution or
joint claiming in the Register of Designs after due
verification.
 Any subsequent alteration or change in the
proprietorship details of the design must also be
notified to the Controller to keep the records
updated.
Copyright on Registration
Section 11 provides that when a design is
registered, the registered proprietor of the design
shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, have
copyright in the design during ten years from the
date of registration. However, before the
expiration of the said ten years, application for
the extension of the period of copyright is made
to the Controller in the prescribed manner, the
Controller shall, on payment of the prescribed
fee, extend the period of copyright for a second
period of five years from the expiration of the
original period of ten years

The High Court of Delhi in the case of
Microfibers Inc. vs. Girdhar and Co. and Anr. laid
down the following guidelines:
1. The definition of artistic work is broad and
includes works with or without artistic quality,
even abstract works like lines or curves arbitrarily
drawn.
2. The holder of an original artistic work has
exclusive rights under Section 14(c) of the
Copyright Act, including the right to reproduce
the work in any material form.
3. Design protection under the Designs Act
cannot be extended to include copyright
protection for industrially produced works.

4. Original paintings/artistic works used for
industrial production still fall within the definition
of artistic work and are entitled to full copyright
protection.
5. Copyright protection for original artistic works
continues to exist even if the intention is for
industrial production.
6. Copyright protection ceases for registered
designs under the Copyright Act, and copyright
protection is not granted for unregistered
designs applied more than 50 times by industrial
process.
7. Copyright for original artistic works persists,
and the author/holder enjoys the longer
protection granted under the Copyright Act for
the original artistic work itself.

Restoration of Lapsed Designs
Section 12 of the Act deals with the restoration
of a design that has ceased to have effect due to
failure to pay the fee for the extension of
copyright. The key points are:
1. If a design has lost its copyright protection due
to non-payment of the extension fee, the
proprietor or their legal representative can apply
for restoration within one year from the date it
ceased to have effect.
2. If the design was held jointly by multiple
persons, one or more of them can apply for
restoration with the Controller's permission,
without the need for all joint holders to join the
application.
3. The application for restoration must be made
in the prescribed manner and accompanied by
the prescribed fee.
4. The application should include a statement
verified in the prescribed manner, explaining the
circumstances that led to the failure to pay the
fee.
5. The Controller may request further evidence
from the applicant if deemed necessary.

Piracy of Registered Design
During the existence of copyright in any design it
shall not be lawful for any person, without the
license or written consent of the registered
proprietor:
i. for the purpose of sale to apply or cause to be
applied, to any article in any class of articles in
which the design is registered, the design or any
fraudulent or obvious imitation thereof, or to do
anything with a view to enable the design to be
so applied;
ii. to import such article for the purposes of sale;
iii. to publish or expose or cause to be published
or exposed for sale, that article.


Appeal
An appeal lies to the High Court against an order
passed by the Controller under the following
provisions:
i. an order under Section 5, refusing registration
of a design; ii. an order under Section 19, passed
in a cancellation petition; iii. an order under
Section 31, passed in a rectification petition; iv.
an order under Section 35, refusing registration
on the ground of public order or morality.

Every appeal shall be made within three months
of the date of the order of the Controller.
The date of such order is the date on which the
order is dispatched.




ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal
                           Believe you
                           can, and
                           you're
                           halfway there.
                           - Theodore
                           Roosevelt        1.1

                           Believe you
                           can, and
                           you're
                           halfway there.
                           - Theodore
                           Roosevelt        1.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           Believe you
                           can, and
                           you're
                           halfway there.
                           - Theodore
                           Roosevelt        1.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal


ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           Believe you
                           can, and
                           you're
                           halfway there.
                           - Theodore
                           Roosevelt        1.1

                           Believe you
                           can, and
                           you're
                           halfway there.
                           - Theodore
                           Roosevelt        1.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           Believe you
                           can, and
                           you're
                           halfway there.
                           - Theodore
                           Roosevelt        1.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           The only way
                           to do great
                           work is to
                           love what you
                           do. - Steve
                           Jobs             2.1

                           The only way
                           to do great
                           work is to
                           love what you
                           do. - Steve
                           Jobs             2.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           The only way
                           to do great
                           work is to
                           love what you
                           do. - Steve
                           Jobs             2.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           The only way
                           to do great
                           work is to
                           love what you
                           do. - Steve
                           Jobs             2.1

                           The only way
                           to do great
                           work is to
                           love what you
                           do. - Steve
                           Jobs
                                            2.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           The only way
                           to do great
                           work is to
                           love what you
                           do. - Steve
                           Jobs             2.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           Don't watch
                           the clock; do
                           what it does.
                           Keep going. -
                           Sam
                           Levenson           3.1

                           Don't watch
                           the clock; do
                           what it does.
                           Keep going. -
                           Sam
                           Levenson           3.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           Don't watch
                           the clock; do
                           what it does.
                           Keep going. -
                           Sam
                           Levenson           3.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           Success is
                           not final,
                           failure is not
                           fatal: It is the
                           courage to
                           continue that
                           counts. -
                           Winston
                           Churchill          4.1

                           Success is
                           not final,
                           failure is not
                           fatal: It is the
                           courage to
                           continue that
                           counts. -
                           Winston
                           Churchill          4.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           Success is
                           not final,
                           failure is not
                           fatal: It is the
                           courage to
                           continue that
                           counts. -
                           Winston
                           Churchill          4.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           Success is
                           not final,
                           failure is not
                           fatal: It is the
                           courage to
                           continue that
                           counts. -
                           Winston
                           Churchill          4.1

                           Success is
                           not final,
                           failure is not
                           fatal: It is the
                           courage to
                           continue that
                           counts. -
                           Winston
                           Churchill          4.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           Success is
                           not final,
                           failure is not
                           fatal: It is the
                           courage to
                           continue that
                           counts. -
                           Winston
                           Churchill          4.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           Your time is
                           limited, don't
                           waste it living
                           someone
                           else's life. -
                           Steve Jobs         5.1
                           Your time is
                           limited, don't
                           waste it living
                           someone
                           else's life. -
                           Steve Jobs        5.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           Your time is
                           limited, don't
                           waste it living
                           someone
                           else's life. -
                           Steve Jobs        5.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           Your time is
                           limited, don't
                           waste it living
                           someone
                           else's life. -
                           Steve Jobs        5.1

                           Your time is
                           limited, don't
                           waste it living
                           someone
                           else's life. -
                           Steve Jobs        5.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           Your time is
                           limited, don't
                           waste it living
                           someone
                           else's life. -
                           Steve Jobs        5.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           The future
                           belongs to
                           those who
                           believe in the
                           beauty of
                           their dreams.
                           - Eleanor
                           Roosevelt         6.1

                           The future
                           belongs to
                           those who
                           believe in the
                           beauty of
                           their dreams.
                           - Eleanor
                           Roosevelt         6.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           The future
                           belongs to
                           those who
                           believe in the
                           beauty of
                           their dreams.
                           - Eleanor
                           Roosevelt         6.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           If you want to
                           achieve
                           greatness,
                           stop asking
                           for
                           permission.       7.1

                           If you want to
                           achieve
                           greatness,
                           stop asking
                           for
                           permission.       7.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                           If you want to
                           achieve
                           greatness,
                           stop asking
                           for
                           permission.       7.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal
                                                        If you want to
                                                        achieve
                                                        greatness,
                                                        stop asking
                                                        for
                                                        permission.      7.1

                                                        If you want to
                                                        achieve
                                                        greatness,
                                                        stop asking
                                                        for
                                                        permission.      7.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                                                        If you want to
                                                        achieve
                                                        greatness,
                                                        stop asking
                                                        for
                                                        permission.      7.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

It's not about how hard you can hit; it's about
how hard you can get hit and keep moving
forward. - Rocky Balboa
                                                  8.1

It's not about how hard you can hit; it's about
how hard you can get hit and keep moving
forward. - Rocky Balboa
                                                  8.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

It's not about how hard you can hit; it's about
how hard you can get hit and keep moving
forward. - Rocky Balboa
                                                  8.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                                                  8.5


                                                  8.5


ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

                                                  8.5


ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The only way to do great work is to love what
you do. - Steve Jobs                                               9.1

The only way to do great work is to love what
you do. - Steve Jobs                                               9.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The only way to do great work is to love what
you do. - Steve Jobs                                               9.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

Believe in yourself and all that you are. Know
that there is something inside you that is greater
than any obstacle. - Christian D. Larson 10.1

Believe in yourself and all that you are. Know
that there is something inside you that is greater
than any obstacle. - Christian D. Larson 10.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

Believe in yourself and all that you are. Know
that there is something inside you that is greater
than any obstacle. - Christian D. Larson 10.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The only limit to our realization of tomorrow will
be our doubts of today. - Franklin D. Roosevelt                   11.1
The only limit to our realization of tomorrow will
be our doubts of today. - Franklin D. Roosevelt          11.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The only limit to our realization of tomorrow will
be our doubts of today. - Franklin D. Roosevelt          11.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The only limit to our realization of tomorrow will
be our doubts of today. - Franklin D. Roosevelt          11.1

The only limit to our realization of tomorrow will
be our doubts of today. - Franklin D. Roosevelt          11.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The only limit to our realization of tomorrow will
be our doubts of today. - Franklin D. Roosevelt          11.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The only limit to our realization of tomorrow will
be our doubts of today. - Franklin D. Roosevelt          11.1

The only limit to our realization of tomorrow will
be our doubts of today. - Franklin D. Roosevelt          11.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The only limit to our realization of tomorrow will
be our doubts of today. - Franklin D. Roosevelt          11.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The only limit to our realization of tomorrow will
be our doubts of today. - Franklin D. Roosevelt          11.1

The only limit to our realization of tomorrow will
be our doubts of today. - Franklin D. Roosevelt          11.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The only limit to our realization of tomorrow will
be our doubts of today. - Franklin D. Roosevelt          11.1

Prof. Abhijeet C. Jaiswal
CS Praveen Choudhary
COPRA 2019


Prof. Abhijeet C. Jaiswal
CS Praveen Choudhary
COPRA 2019

                                                     1



                                                     1


Prof. Abhijeet C. Jaiswal
CS Praveen Choudhary
COPRA 2019

                                                     1


Prof. Abhijeet C. Jaiswal
CS Praveen Choudhary
LM Act 2009

Prof. Abhijeet C. Jaiswal
CS Praveen Choudhary
LM Act 2009

                                                 13

                                                 13

Prof. Abhijeet C. Jaiswal
CS Praveen Choudhary
LM Act 2009

                                                 13

Prof. Abhijeet C. Jaiswal
CS Praveen Choudhary
RERA 2016

Prof. Abhijeet C. Jaiswal
CS Praveen Choudhary
RERA 2016

                                               14.1
                                                14.1

Prof. Abhijeet C. Jaiswal
CS Praveen Choudhary
RERA 2016

                                                14.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

Your time is limited, don't waste it living
someone else's life. - Steve Jobs                        15.1

Your time is limited, don't waste it living
someone else's life. - Steve Jobs                        15.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

Your time is limited, don't waste it living
someone else's life. - Steve Jobs                        15.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal


ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal


Your time is limited, don't waste it living
someone else's life. - Steve Jobs                        15.1

Your time is limited, don't waste it living
someone else's life. - Steve Jobs                        15.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal


Your time is limited, don't waste it living
someone else's life. - Steve Jobs                        15.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The best way to predict the future is to create it. -
Peter Drucker                                            16.2

The best way to predict the future is to create it. -
Peter Drucker                                            16.2

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal


Your time is limited, don't waste it living
someone else's life. - Steve Jobs                        15.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal


The best way to predict the future is to create it. -
Peter Drucker                                            16.1


The best way to predict the future is to create it. -
Peter Drucker                                            16.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal


The best way to predict the future is to create it. -
Peter Drucker                                            16.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The best way to predict the future is to create it. -
Peter Drucker                                           16.13

The best way to predict the future is to create it. -
Peter Drucker                                           16.13

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The best way to predict the future is to create it. -
Peter Drucker                                           16.13

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

Your dreams don't work unless you do. - John C.
Maxwell                                                  17.1
Your dreams don't work unless you do. - John C.
Maxwell                                           17.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

Your dreams don't work unless you do. - John C.
Maxwell                                           17.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

Your dreams don't work unless you do. - John C.
Maxwell                                           17.1

Your dreams don't work unless you do. - John C.
Maxwell                                           17.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

Your dreams don't work unless you do. - John C.
Maxwell                                           17.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

You are never too old to set another goal or to
dream a new dream. - C.S. Lewis                   18.1

You are never too old to set another goal or to
dream a new dream. - C.S. Lewis                   18.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

You are never too old to set another goal or to
dream a new dream. - C.S. Lewis                   18.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

You are never too old to set another goal or to
dream a new dream. - C.S. Lewis                   18.1

You are never too old to set another goal or to
dream a new dream. - C.S. Lewis                   18.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

You are never too old to set another goal or to
dream a new dream. - C.S. Lewis                   18.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The only place where success comes before
work is in the dictionary. - Vidal Sassoon 19.1

The only place where success comes before
work is in the dictionary. - Vidal Sassoon 19.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The only place where success comes before
work is in the dictionary. - Vidal Sassoon 19.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The future depends on what you do today. -
Mahatma Gandhi                                    20.1

The future depends on what you do today. -
Mahatma Gandhi                                    20.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The future depends on what you do today. -
Mahatma Gandhi                                    20.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal

The future depends on what you do today. -
Mahatma Gandhi                                    20.1

The future depends on what you do today. -
Mahatma Gandhi                                    20.1

ECIPL
Prof Abhijeet C. Jaiswal
The future depends on what you do today. -
Mahatma Gandhi                                             20.1
(e) any misleading, deceptive or unfair trade
practices are not used;
(f) direct selling is not represented to the
consumer as being a form of market research;
(g) the promotional literature, advertisement or
mail contain the name and address or telephone
number of the direct selling company, and
include the mobile number of the direct seller;
(h) direct selling shall not state or imply that a
guarantee, warranty or other expression having
substantially the same meaning, offers to the
consumer any rights in additional to those
provided by law, when it does not;
(i) the terms of any guarantee or warranty,
including the name and address of the
guarantor, shall be easily available to the
consumer and limitations on consumer rights or
remedies, where permitted by law, shall be clear
and conspicuous;
(j) the remedial action open to the consumer
shall be clearly set out in the order form or other
accompanying literature provided with the goods
or service;
(k) the presentation of the offer does not contain
or refer to any testimonial, endorsement or
supportive documentation unless it is genuine,
verifiable and relevant;
(l) when after-sales service is offered, details of
the service are included in the guarantee or
stated
elsewhere in the offer and if the consumer
accepts the offer, information shall be given on
how the consumer can activate the service and
communicate with the service agent;
(m) products, including, where applicable,
samples, are suitably packaged for delivery to
the consumer and for possible return, in
compliance with the appropriate health and
safety standards;
(n) unless otherwise stipulated in the offer,
orders shall be fulfilled within the delivery date
proposed to the consumer at the time of
purchase and the consumer shall be informed of
any undue delay as soon as it becomes
apparent or comes within the knowledge of the
direct selling entity or the concerned direct seller;
(o) in cases of delay under clause (n), any
request for cancellation of the order by the
consumer shall be granted, irrespective of
whether the consumer has been informed of the
delay, and the
deposit, if any, shall be refunded as per the
cancellation terms proposed to the consumer at
the time of purchase, and if it is not possible to
prevent delivery, the consumer shall be informed
of the right to return the product at the direct
selling company's or the direct seller's cost as
per the procedure for return of the goods
proposed to the consumer at the time of
purchase;
(p) right of return offered by that entity shall be in
writing;
(q) whether payment for the offer is on an
immediate sale or installment basis, the price
and terms of payment shall be clearly stated in
the offer together with the nature of any
additional charges such as postage, handling
and taxes and, whenever possible, the amounts
of such charges;
(r) in the case of sales by installment, the credit
terms, including the amount of any deposit or
payment on account, the number, amount and
periodicity of such installments and the total
price compared with the immediate selling price,
if any, shall be clearly shown in the offer;
(s) any information needed by the consumer to
understand the cost, interest and terms of any
other form of credit is provided either in the offer
or when the credit is offered;
(t) unless the duration of the offer and the price
are clearly stated in the offer, prices shall be
maintained for a reasonable period of time;
(u) the procedure for payment and debt
collection shall be determined in writing before
any contract is signed and it shall be such as to
avoid undue inconvenience to the consumer,
making due allowance for delays outside the
consumer's control;
(v) the provisions of the Legal Metrology Act,
2009 and the rules framed thereunder shall be
followed.
(ii) A direct selling entity or direct seller shall not-
(a) indulge in fraudulent activities or sales and
shall take reasonable steps to ensure that
participants do not indulge in false or misleading
representations or any other form of fraud,
coercion, harassment, or unconscionable or
unlawful means;
(b) engage in, or cause or permit, any conduct
that is misleading or likely to mislead with regard
to any material particulars relating to its direct
selling business, or to the goods or services
being sold by itself or by the direct seller;
(c) indulge in mis-selling of products or services
to consumers;
(d) use, or cause or permit to be used, any
fraudulent, coercive, unconscionable or unlawful
means, or cause harassment, for promoting its
direct selling business, or for sale of its goods or
services;
(e) refuse to take back spurious goods or
deficient services and refund the consideration
paid for goods and services provided;
(f) charge any entry fee or subscription fee.
(iii) A direct selling entity and a direct seller shall
comply with the requirements of all relevant
laws, including payment of taxes and deductions
thereunder.
(iv) A direct selling entity and a direct seller shall
not induce consumers to make a purchase
based upon the representation that they can
reduce or recover the price by referring
prospective customers to the direct sellers for
similar purchases.
It may be noted that "Miss-Selling" means selling
a product or service by misrepresenting in order
to successfully complete a sale and includes
providing consumers with misleading information
about a product or service or omitting key
information about a product or providing
information that makes the product appear to be
something it is not.
Prohibition of Pyramid Scheme and Money
Circulation Scheme
Direct Selling Entity or Direct Seller shall not-
(a) promote a Pyramid Scheme or enroll any
person to such scheme or participate in such
arrangement in any manner whatsoever in the
garb of doing direct selling business;
(b) participate in money circulation scheme in
the garb of doing direct selling business.
Money Circulation Scheme means the schemes
defined in clause (c) of section 2 of the Prize
Chits and Money Circulation Schemes (Banning)
Act, 1978.
Pyramid Scheme means a multi layered network
of subscribers to a scheme formed by
subscribers enrolling one or more subscribers in
order to receive any benefit, directly or indirectly,
as a result of enrolment or action or performance
of additional subscribers to the scheme, in which
the subscribers enrolling further subscribers
occupy a higher position and the enrolled
subscribers a lower position, resulting in a multi-
layered network of subscribers with successive
enrolments.
Protection of Action Taken in good Faith
According to Section 98 of the Act, no suit,
prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against the Presidents and members of the
District Commission, the State Commission and
the National Commission, the Chief
Commissioner, the Commissioner, any officer or
employee and other person performing any duty
under this Act, for any act which is in good faith
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this
Act or under any rule or order made thereunder.
Act not in derogation of any other law
Section 100 states that the provisions of
Consumer Protection Act, 2019 shall be in
addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being in
force.
LESSON ROUND-UP
l Consumer Protection Act, 2019 provides for
protection of the interests of consumers and for
the said purpose, to establish authorities for
timely and effective administration and
settlement of consumers' disputes and for
matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
l Consumer means any person who (i) buys any
goods for a consideration which has been paid or
promised or partly paid and partly promised, or
under any system of deferred payment and
includes any user of such goods other than the
person who buys such goods for consideration
paid or promised or partly paid or partly
promised, or under any system of deferred
payment, when such use is made with the
approval of such person, but does not include a
person who obtains such goods for resale or for
any commercial purpose; or (ii) hires or avails of
any service for a consideration which has been
paid or promised or partly paid and partly
promised, or under any system of deferred
payment and includes any beneficiary of such
service other than the person who hires or avails
of the services for consideration paid or
promised, or partly paid and partly promised, or
under any system of deferred payment, when
such services are availed of with the approval of
the first mentioned person, but does not include
a person who avails of such service for any
commercial purpose.
l The expression "commercial purpose" does not
include use by a person of goods bought and
used by him exclusively for the purpose of
earning his livelihood, by means of self-
employment and the expressions "buys any
goods" and "hires or avails any services"
includes offline or online transactions through
electronic means or by teleshopping or direct
selling or multi-level marketing.
l Direct selling means marketing, distribution and
sale of goods or provision of services through a
network of sellers, other than through a
permanent retail location.
l E-Commerce means buying or selling of goods
or services including digital products over digital
or electronic network.
l Electronic service provider means a person
who provides technologies or processes to
enable a product seller to engage in advertising
or selling goods or services to a consumer and
includes any online market place or online
auction sites.
l Endorsement in relation to an advertisement,
means any message, verbal statement,
demonstration; or depiction of the name,
signature, likeness or other identifiable personal
characteristics of an individual; or depiction of
the name or seal of any institution or
organisation, which makes the consumer to
believe that it reflects the opinion, finding or
experience of the person making such
endorsement.
l Express warranty means any material
statement, affirmation of fact, promise or
description relating to a product or service
warranting that it conforms to such material
statement, affirmation, promise or description
and includes any sample or model of a product
warranting that the whole of such product
conforms to such sample or model.
l Product liability means the responsibility of a
product manufacturer or product seller, of any
product or service, to compensate for any harm
caused to a consumer by such defective product
manufactured or sold or by deficiency in services
relating thereto.

l Section 10 empowers the Central Government
to establish a Central Consumer Protection
Authority to be known as the Central Authority to
regulate matters relating to violation of rights of
consumers, unfair trade practices and false or
misleading advertisements which are prejudicial
to the interests of public and consumers and to
promote, protect and enforce the rights of
consumers as a class.
l District Commission shall have jurisdiction to
entertain complaints where the value of the
goods or services paid as consideration does not
exceed one crore rupees.
l State Commission shall have jurisdiction to
entertain complaints where the value of the
goods or services paid as consideration,
exceeds rupees one crore, but does not exceed
rupees ten crore.
l National Commission shall have jurisdiction to
entertain Complaints where the value of the
goods or services paid as consideration exceeds
rupees ten crore.
l Product liability action may be brought by a
complainant against a product manufacturer or a
product service provider or a product seller, as
the case may be, for any harm caused to him on
account of a defective product.
TEST YOURSELF
(These are meant for re-capitulation only.
Answers to these questions are not to be
submitted for evaluation)
1. Discuss in detail the objects of Consumer
Protection Act, 2019.
2. Briefly discuss the jurisdiction of the various
District, State and National Commissions under
the Consumer Protection Act, 2019?
3. Discuss the power of Central Consumer
Protection Authority?
4. Write short note on the following:
(i) Express Warranty
                                                (iv)
(ii) Product Liability                          Consumer.
5. Discuss unfair trade practice under Consumer
Protection Act, 2019.

LIST OF FURTHER READINgS
l Bare Act - Consumer Protection Act, 2019 and
rules made thereunder.
l Consumer Protection Law and Practice- Dr.
V.K. Aggarwal
OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDINg
WEbSITES / vIDEO LINKS)
? https://consumeraffairs.nic.in/




REgULATORY FRAMEWORK
l Legal Metrology Act, 2009
                                                      Essential
l Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities)              Commodities
Rules, 2011 ?                                         Act, 1955
INTRODUCTION
Legal metrology is the application of legal
requirements to measurements and measuring
instruments. Very often, small errors in either
direction average out over a large number of
measurements. But biased errors can create
considerable financial prejudice and can have
serious economic consequences for the end
consumer.
Legal Metrology is the name by which the law
relating to weights and measures is known in
international parlance. Legal Metrology is very
vital for scientific, technological and industrial
progress of any country. The establishment of
national standards of weights and measures and
their proper enforcement aim at ensuring
accuracy of measurements and measuring
instruments and thus legal metrology
strengthens the national economy in a broader
sense besides being a potential instrument of
consumer protection. The scope of legal
metrology according to international practice
extends to three broad fields of human activities,
namely, commercial transactions, industrial
measurements and measurements needed to
ensure public health and human safety. The
coverage of legal metrology varies from country
to country. In some, almost all practical
measurements are brought under the purview of
legal metrology, whereas in other countries legal
metrology finds restricted application in a few
quantities like mass, length and volume used in
trade and commerce. In most of the countries,
however, legal metrology encompasses
measurements which have a bearing on the
protection of individuals from the financial and
environmental points of view.
Legal metrology can be defined as that part of
metrology which deals with units of
measurement, methods of measurement and
measuring instruments in so far as they concern
statutory, technical and legal requirements which
have the ultimate object of assuring public
guarantee from the point of view of security and
of appropriate accuracy of measurements.
International Organization of Legal Metrology
(OIML)
The International Organization of Legal
Metrology (OIML) is an intergovernmental treaty
organization whose membership includes
Member States, countries which participate
actively in technical activities, and
Corresponding Members, countries which join
the OIML as observers. It was established in
1955 in order to promote the global
harmonization of legal metrology procedures.
Since that time, the OIML has developed a
worldwide technical structure that provides its
Members with metrological guidelines for the
elaboration of national and regional
requirements concerning the manufacture and
use of measuring instruments for legal metrology
applications.
According to OIML, Legal Metrology is the
entirety of the legislative, administrative and
technical procedures established by, or by
reference to public authorities, and implemented
on their behalf in order to specify and to ensure,
in a regulatory or contractual manner, the
appropriate quality and credibility of
measurements related to official controls, trade,
health, safety and the environment.
The OIML develops model regulations,
International Recommendations, which provide
Members with an internationally agreed-upon
basis for the establishment of national legislation
on various categories of measuring instruments.
Given the increasing national implementation of
OIML guidelines, more and more manufacturers
are referring to OIML International
Recommendations to ensure that their products
meet international specifications for metrological
performance and testing.
The International Organization of Legal
Metrology is an intergovernmental treaty
organization which:
* develops model regulations, standards and
related documents for use by legal metrology
authorities and industry;
* provides mutual recognition systems which
reduce trade barriers and costs in a global
market; ? represents the interests of the legal
metrology community within international
organizations and forums concerned with
metrology, standardization, testing, certification
and accreditation;
* promotes and facilitates the exchange of
knowledge and competencies within the legal
metrology community worldwide;
* cooperates with other metrology bodies to raise
awareness of the contribution that a sound legal
metrology infrastructure can make to a modern
economy.
OIML Certificate System for Measuring
Instruments
The OIML Certificate System for Measuring
Instruments was introduced in 1991 to facilitate
administrative procedures and lower the costs
associated with the international trade of
measuring instruments subject to legal
requirements. The System provides the
possibility for a manufacturer to obtain an OIML
Certificate and a Test Report indicating that a
given instrument type (pattern) complies with the
requirements of the relevant OIML International
Recommendations. Certificates are delivered by
OIML Member States that have established one
or several Issuing Authorities responsible for
processing applications by manufacturers
wishing to have their instrument types (patterns)
certified.
Certificates issued by OIML are accepted by
national metrology services on a voluntary basis,
and as the climate for mutual confidence and
recognition of test results develops between
OIML Members, the System serves to simplify
the type (pattern) approval process for
manufacturers and metrology authorities by
eliminating costly duplication of application and
test procedures.
The objectives of the OIML Certification System
are:
(a) to promote the global harmonization, uniform
interpretation and implementation of legal
metrological requirements for measuring
instruments and/or modules;
(b) to avoid unnecessary re-testing when
obtaining national type evaluations and
approvals, and to support the recognition of
measuring instruments and/or modules under
legal metrological control, while achieving and
maintaining confidence in the results in support
of facilitating the global trade of individual
instruments; and
(c) to establish rules and procedures for
fostering mutual confidence among participating
OIML Member States and Corresponding
Members in the results of type evaluations that
indicate conformity of measuring instruments
and/or modules, under legal metrological control,
to the metrological and technical requirements
established in the applicable OIML
Recommendation(s).
DEFINITIONS
Section 2 contains definitions of various terms
used in the Legal Metrology Act. Some of the
important definitions are reproduced hereunder.
Dealer
According to section 2(b) Dealer in relation to
any weight or measure, means a person who,
carries on, directly or otherwise, the business of
buying, selling, supplying or distributing any such
weight or measure, whether for cash or for
deferred payment or for commission,
remuneration or other valuable consideration;
and includes a commission agent, an importer, a
manufacturer, who sells, supplies, distributes or
otherwise delivers any weight or measure
manufactured by him to any person other than a
dealer.
Export
According to section 2(d) "export'' with its
grammatical variations and cognate expressions,
means taking out of India to a place outside
India.
Import
According section 2(e) "import" with its
grammatical variations and cognate expressions,
means bringing into India from a place outside
India.
Label
Under clause (j) of section 2 "label" means any
written, marked, stamped, printed or graphic
matter affixed to, or appearing upon any pre-
packaged commodity.
Legal Metrology
As per section 2(g) "legal metrology" means that
part of metrology which treats units of
weighment and measurement, methods of
weighment and measurement and weighing and
measuring instruments, in relation to the
mandatory technical and legal requirements
which have the object of ensuring public
guarantee from the point of view of security and
accuracy of the weighments and measurements.
Manufacture
As per section 2(i) "manufacturer" in relation to
any weight or measure, means a person who-
(i) manufactures weight or measure;
(ii) manufactures one or more parts, and
acquires other parts, of such weight or measure
and, after assembling those parts, claims the
end product to be a weight or measure
manufactured by himself or itself, as the case
may be;
(iii) does not manufacture any part of such
weight or measure but assembles parts thereof
manufactured by others and claims the end
product to be a weight or measure manufactured
by himself or itself, as the case may be;
(iv) puts, or causes to be put, his own mark on
any complete weight or measure made or
manufactured by any other person and claims
such product to be a weight or measure made or
manufactured by himself or itself, as the case
may be.
Protection
Section 2(k) define "protection" as to mean the
utilisation of reading obtained from any weight or
measure, for the purpose of determining any
step which is required to be taken to safeguard
the well-being of any human being or animal, or
to protect any commodity, vegetation or thing,
whether individually or collectively.
Pre-packed Commodity
Section 2(l) define "pre-packaged commodity" as
to mean a commodity which without the
purchaser being present is placed in a package
of whatever nature, whether sealed or not, so
that the product contained therein has a pre-
determined quantity.
Person
As per section 2(m) the term "person" includes,-
(i) a Hindu undivided family;
(ii) every department or office;
(iii) every organisation established or constituted
by Government;
(iv) every local authority within the territory of
India;
(v) a company, firm and association of
individuals;
(vi) trust constituted under an Act;
(vii) every co-operative society, constituted
under an Act;
(viii) every other society registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860.
Premises
As per section 2 (n) the term "premises"
includes-
(i) a place where any business, industry,
production or transaction is carried on by a
person, whether by himself or through an agent,
by whatever name called, including the person
who carries on the business in such premises;
(ii) a warehouse, godown or other place where
any weight or measure or other goods are stored
or exhibited;
(iii) a place where any books of account or other
documents pertaining to any trade or transaction
are kept;
(iv) a dwelling house, if any part thereof is used
for the purpose of carrying on any business,
industry, production or trade;
(v) a vehicle or vessel or any other mobile
device, with the help of which any transaction or
business is carried on.
Repairer
Section 2 (P) defines "repairer" as to mean a
person who repairs a weight or measure and
includes a person who adjusts, cleans, lubricates
or paints any weight or measure or renders any
other service to such weight or measure to
ensure that such weight or measure conforms to
the standards established by or under this Act.
Sale
Sale, with its grammatical variations and cognate
expressions, means transfer of property in any
weight, measure or other goods by one person to
another for cash or for deferred payment or for
any other valuable consideration and includes a
transfer of any weight, measure or other goods
on the hire-purchase system or any other system
of payment by instalments, but does not include
a mortgage or hypothecation of, or a charge or
pledge on, such weight, measure or other goods.
[Section 2 (r)]
Seal
As per section 2(s) "seal" means a device or
process by which a stamp is made, and includes
any wire or other accessory which is used for
ensuring the integrity of any stamp.
Stamp
Section 2(t) defines "stamp" as to mean a mark,
made by impressing, casting, engraving, etching,
branding, affixing pre-stressed paper seal or any
other process in relation to, any weight or
measure with a view to-
(i) certifying that such weight or measure
conforms to the standard specified by or under
this Act, or
(ii) indicating that any mark which was previously
made thereon certifying that such weight or
measure conforms to the standards specified by
or under this Act, has been obliterated.
Transaction
Under section 2(u) "transaction" means,-
(i) any contract, whether for sale, purchase,
exchange or any other purpose, or
(ii) any assessment of royalty, toll, duty or other
dues, or
(iii) the assessment of any work done, wages
due or services rendered.
verification
As per section 2(v) "verification", with its
grammatical variations and cognate expressions,
includes, in relation to any weight or measure,
the process of comparing, checking, testing or
adjusting such weight or measure with a view to
ensuring that such weight or measure conforms
to the standards established by or under this Act
and also includes re-verification and calibration.
Weight and measure
Under section 2(w) "weight or measure" means a
weight or measure specified by or under this Act
and includes a weighing or measuring
instrument.
STANDARD WEIgHTS AND MEASURES
Chapter II of the Act containing sections 4 to 12
deals with standard weight and measure.
Section 4 provides units of weights and
measures to be based on metric system. Section
5 provides the base unit of weights and
measures. Section 6 deals with base unit of
numeration. Section 7 provides the standard
units of weights and measures. Section 8 states
standard weight, measure or numeral. Section 9
provides the reference, secondary and working
standard. Section 10 deals with use of weight or
measure for particular purposes. Section 11
contains prohibition of quotation, etc., otherwise
than in terms of standard units of weight,
measure or numeration.
Section 4 of the Act provides that every unit of
weight or measure shall be in accordance with
the metric system based on the international
system of units.
Section 5 of the Act provides that the base unit
of length shall be the meter; mass shall be the
kilogram; time shall be the second; electric
current shall be the ampere; thermodynamic
temperature shall be the Kelvin; luminous
intensity shall be the candela; and amount of
substance shall be the mole.
Section 6 states that the base unit of numeration
shall be the unit of the international form of
Indian numeral. Every numeration shall be made
in accordance with the decimal system. The
decimal multiples and sub- multiples of the
numerals shall be of such denominations and be
written in such manner as may be prescribed.
As per section 7 of the Act the base units of
weights and measures specified in section 5
shall be the standard units of weights and
measures. The base unit of numeration specified
in section 6 shall be the standard unit of
numeration. For the purpose of deriving the
value of base, derived and other units mentioned
in section 5, the Central Government shall
prepare or cause to be prepared objects or
equipments in such manner as may be
prescribed. The physical characteristics,
configuration, constructional details, materials,
equipments, performance, tolerances, period of
re-verification, methods or procedures of tests
shall be such as may be prescribed.
Section 8 provides that any weight or measure
which conforms to the standard unit of such
weight or measure and also conforms to such of
the provisions of section 7 as are applicable to it
shall be the standard weight or measure. Any
numeral which conforms to the provisions of
section 6 shall be the standard numeral.
No weight, measure or numeral, other than the
standard weight, measure or numeral, shall be
used as a standard weight, measure or numeral.
No weight or measure, shall be manufactured or
imported unless it conforms to the standards of
weight or measure specified under section 8.
However, the aforesaid provisions shall not
apply for manufacture done exclusively for
export or for the purpose of any scientific
investigation or research.
Section 11 of the Act provides that no person
shall, in relation to any goods, things or service,
quote, or make announcement of, whether by
word of mouth or otherwise, any price or charge,
or issue or exhibit any price list, invoice, cash
memo or other document, or prepare or publish
any advertisement, poster or other document, or
indicate the net quantity of a pre-packaged
commodity, or express in relation to any
transaction or protection, any quantity or
dimension, otherwise than in accordance with
the standard unit of weight, measure or
numeration.
It may be noted that the provisions mentioned
above shall not be applicable for export of any
goods, things or service.
Section 12 provides that any custom, usage,
practice or method of whatever nature which
permits a person to demand, receive or cause to
be demanded or received, any quantity of article,
thing or service in excess of or less than, the
quantity specified by weight, measure or number
in the contract or other agreement in relation to
the said article, thing or service, shall be void.
Appointment and Power of Director, Controller
and legal metrology officers
Chapter III of the Act containing sections 13 to
23 of the Act deals with appointment and powers
of director, controller and legal metrology
officers.
Section 13 of the Act empowers the Central
Government to appoint (by Notification) a
Director of legal metrology, Additional Director,
Joint Director, Deputy Director, Assistant
Director and other employees for exercising the
powers and discharging the duties conferred or
imposed on them by or under this Act in relation
to inter-State trade and commerce.
The Director and every legal metrology officer,
appointed, shall exercise such powers and
discharge such functions in respect of such local
limits as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify. Every legal metrology officer
shall exercise powers and discharge duties
under the general superintendence, direction
and control of the Director.
The Director, the Controller and every legal
metrology officer authorised to perform any duty
by or under this Act shall be deemed to be a
public servant within the meaning of section 21
of the Indian Penal Code. No suit, prosecution or
other legal proceeding shall lie against the
Director, the Controller and legal metrology
officer authorised to perform any duty by or
under this Act in respect of anything which is in
good faith done or intended to be done under this
Act or any rule or order made there under.
The Central Government may, with the consent
of the State Government and subject to such
conditions, limitations and restrictions as it may
specify in this behalf, delegate such of the
powers of the Director under this Act as it may
think fit to the Controller of legal metrology in the
State, and such Controller may, if he is of
opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the
public interest so to do, delegate such of the
powers delegated to him as he may think fit to
any legal metrology officer and where any such
delegation of powers is made by such Controller,
the person to whom such powers are delegated
shall exercise those powers in the same manner
and with the same effect as if they had been
conferred on him directly by this Act and not by
way of delegation.
Section 14 of the Act, provides that the State
Government may, by notification, appoint a
Controller of legal metrology, Additional
Controller, Joint Controller, Deputy Controller,
Assistant Controller, Inspector and other
employees for the State for exercising the
powers and discharging the duties conferred or
imposed on them by or under this Act in relation
to intra State trade and commerce.
The Controller and every legal metrology officer
so appointed shall exercise such powers and
discharge such functions in respect of such local
limits as the State Government may, by
notification, specify. Every legal metrology officer
shall exercise and discharge the duties under the
general superintendence, direction and control of
the Controller.
Power of inspection, seizure
Section 15 of the Act confer powers of
inspection on the Director, Controller or any legal
metrology officer may, if he has any reason to
believe, whether from any information given to
him by any person and taken down in writing or
from personal knowledge or otherwise, that any
weight or measure or other goods in relation to
which any trade and commerce has taken place
or is intended to take place and in respect of
which an offence punishable under this Act
appears to have been, or is likely to be,
committed are either kept or concealed in any
premises or are in the course of transportation.
The powers include entry at any reasonable time
into any such premises and search for and
inspect any weight, measure or other goods in
relation to which trade and commerce has taken
place, or is intended to take place and any
record, register or other document relating
thereto. The power also include seizure of any
weight, measure or other goods and any record,
register or other document or article which he
has reason to believe may furnish evidence
indicating that an offence punishable under the
Act has been, or is likely to be, committed in the
course of or in relation to, any trade and
commerce.
Where any goods seized are subject to speedy
or natural decay, the Director, Controller or legal
metrology officer may dispose of such goods in
such manner as may be prescribed. Every
search or seizure made under this section shall
be carried out in accordance with the provisions
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating
to searches and seizures.
Forfeiture
Every non-standard or unverified weight or
measure and every package used in the course
of, or in relation to, any trade and commerce and
seized under section 15, shall be liable to be
forfeited, to the State Government. However,
such unverified weight or measure shall not be
forfeited to the State Government if the person
from whom such weight or measure was seized
gets the same verified and stamped within such
time as may be prescribed. Every weight,
measure or other goods seized under section 15
but not forfeited shall be disposed of by such
authority and in such manner as may be
prescribed.
Manufacturers, etc., to maintain records and
registers
Section 17 of the Act provides that every
manufacturer, repairer or dealer of weight or
measure shall maintain such records and
registers as may be prescribed. The records and
registers maintained shall be produced at the
time of inspection to the persons authorised for
the purpose of Inspection.
Under the Legal Metrology (Packaged
Commodities) Rules, 2011 certain mandatory
declarations are required to be made on all pre-
packaged commodities in the interest of
consumers like name and address of the
manufacturer/packer/importer, country of origin,
name of the commodity, net quantity, month and
year of manufacturing, retail sale price in the
form of Maximum Retail Price (MRP) Rs.
(inclusive of all taxes) and consumer care details
etc.
The penalty provisions are made under section
36(1) of the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 for the
violation in respect of the mandatory
declarations on the label. Under the provisions
of the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 and the Legal
Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules,
2011, State Governments take action for
violations of the Rules.
What is Pre-Packaged Commodity?
Pre-packaged commodity means a commodity
which without the purchaser being present is
placed in a package of whatever nature, whether
sealed or not, so that the product contained
therein has a predetermined quantity.
Declarations on Pre-
Packaged Commodities
Manner in which Declaration Shall be Made
Section 18 states that no person shall
manufacture, pack, sell, import, distribute,
deliver, offer, expose or possess for sale any
prepackaged commodity unless such package is
in such standard quantities or number and bears
thereon such declarations and particulars in
such manner as may be prescribed. Any
advertisement mentioning the retail sale price of
a pre- packaged commodity shall contain a
declaration as to the net quantity or number of
the commodity contained in the package in such
form and manner as may be prescribed.
Rule 9 of the Legal Metrology (Packaged
Commodities) Rules, 2011 deals with manner in
which declaration shall be made. It provides that:
(1) Every declaration which is required to be
made on a package under these rules shall be:
(a) legible and prominent;
(b) numerals of the retail sale price and net
quantity declaration shall be printed, painted or
inscribed on the package in a colour that
contrasts conspicuously with the background of
the label.
It may be noted that (i) where any label
information is blown, formed or molded on a
glass or plastic surface such information need
not be required to be presented in a contrasting
colour; (ii) where any declaration on a package is
printed either in the form of hand-writing or hand-
script, such declaration shall be clear,
unambiguous and legible.
(2) No declaration shall be made so as to require
it to be read through any liquid commodity
contained in the package.
(3) Where a package is provided with an outside
container or wrapper such container or wrapper
shall also contain all the declarations which are
required to appear on the package except where
such container or wrapper itself is transparent
and the declarations on the package itself are
easily readable through such outside wrapper.
Provided that no such declarations on the inner
package is required if the inner package does
not contain any declaration on its outer cover.

(4) The particulars of the declarations required to
be specified under this rule on a package shall
either be in Hindi in Devnagri script or in English.
It may be noted that nothing contained in this
sub-rule shall prevent the use of any other
language in addition to Hindi or English
language.
What is Principal Display Panel?
In relation to a package means the total surface
area of package where the information required
under these rules are to be given in the following
manner:
(i) All the information could be grouped together
and given at one place; or
(ii) The pre-printed information could be grouped
together and given in one place and on-line
information grouped together in other place.
What is the Area prescribed for Principal Display
Panel for Declaration?
The area not including the top, bottom, flange at
top and bottom of cans, and shoulders and neck
of bottle and jar shall be determined as follows:
(i) In the case of a rectangular package, where
one entire side can properly be considered to be
the principal display panel side, the product of
the height multiplies by the width of that side.
(ii) In the case of a cylindrical or nearly
cylindrical package, prescribed percent of the
product of the height of the package multiplied
by the circumference.
(iii) In the case of any other shaped package,
prescribed percent of the total surface of the
package, or an area considered to be a principle
display panel of the package.
Registration for importer of weight or measure
Section 19 provides that no person shall import
any weight or measure unless he is registered
with the Director in such manner and on
payment of such fees, as may be prescribed. No
weight or measure, whether singly or as a part or
component of any machine shall be imported
unless it conforms to the standards of weight or
measure

established by or under this Act (Section 20).
Approval of model
Every person, before manufacturing or importing
any weight or measure shall seek the approval of
model of such weight or measure in such
manner, on payment of such fee and from such
authority as may be prescribed. However, such
approval of model may not be required in respect
of any cast iron, brass, bullion, or carat weight or
any beam scale, length measures (not being
measuring tapes) which are ordinarily used in
retail trade for measuring textiles or timber,
capacity measures, not exceeding twenty litre in
capacity, which are ordinarily used in retail trade
for measuring kerosene, milk or potable liquors.
It may be noted that the prescribed authority
may, if he is satisfied that the model of any
weight or measure which has been approved in a
country outside India conforms to the standards
established by or under this Act, approve such
model without any test or after such test as he
may deem fit.

Prohibition on manufacture, repair or sale of
weight or measure without licence
Section 23 of the Act provides that no person
shall manufacture, repair or sell, or offer, expose
or possess for repair or sale, any weight or
measure unless he holds a licence issued by the
Controller. However, no licence to repair shall be
required by a manufacturer for repair of his own
weight or measure in a State other than the State
of manufacture of the same. The Controller shall
issue a licence in such form and manner, on
such conditions, for such period and such area
of jurisdiction and on payment of such fee as
may be prescribed.
Section 24 provides for verification and stamping
of weight or measure. Every person having any
weight or measure in his possession, custody or
control in circumstances indicating that such
weight or measure is being, or is intended or is
likely to be, used by him in any transaction or for
protection, shall, before putting such weight or
measure into such use, have such weight or
measure verified at such place and during such
hours as the Controller may, by general or
special order, specify in this behalf, on payment
of such fees as may be prescribed.
The Central Government may prescribe the
kinds of weights and measures for which the
verification is to be done through the
Government approved Test Centre. The
Government approved Test Centre shall be
notified by the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be, in such
manner, on such terms and conditions and on
payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
Offences and Penalties
Chapter V of the Act deals with offences and
penalties.
Section 25 of the Act provides for penalty for use
of non-standard weight or measure. The section
stipulates that whoever uses or keeps for use
any weight or measure or makes use of any
numeration otherwise than in accordance with
the standards of weight or measure or the
standard of numeration, as the case may be,
specified by or under this Act, shall be punished
with fine which may extend to twenty-five
thousand rupees and for the second or
subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to six months and also
with fine.
Under section 26 whoever tampers with, or
alters in any way, any reference standard,
secondary standard or working standard or
increases or decreases or alters any weight or
measure with a view to deceiving any person or
knowing or having reason to believe that any
person is likely to be deceived thereby, except
where such alteration is made for the correction
of any error noticed therein on verification, shall
be punished with fine which may extend to fifty
thousand rupees and for the second and
subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than six months but which
may extend to one year or with fine or with both.
Section 27 provides that every person who
manufactures or causes to be manufactured or
sells or offers, exposes or possesses for sale,
any weight or measure which does not conform
to the standards of weight or measure specified
by or under this Act; or which bears thereon any
inscription of weight, measure or number which
does not conform to the standards of weight,
measure or numeration specified by or under this
Act, except where he is permitted to do so under
this Act, shall be punished with a fine which may
extend to twenty thousand rupees and for the
second or subsequent offence with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years or
with fine or with both.
Section 30 dealing with penalty for transaction in
contravention of standard weight or measure
provides that whoever, in selling any article or
thing by weight, measure or number, delivers or
causes to be delivered to the purchaser any
quantity or number of that article or thing less
than the quantity or number contracted for or
paid for; or in rendering any service by weight,
measure or number, renders that service less
than the service contracted for or paid for; or in
buying any article or thing by weight, measure or
number, fraudulently receives, or causes to be
received any quantity or number of that article or
thing in excess of the quantity or number
contracted for or paid for; or in obtaining any
service by weight, measure or number, obtains
that service in excess of the service contracted
for or paid for, shall be punished with fine which
may extend to ten thousand rupees, and; for the
second or subsequent offence, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine, or with both.
Under section 31, Whoever, being required by or
under this Act or the rules made thereunder to
submit returns, maintain any record or register,
or being required by the Director or the
Controller or any legal metrology officer to
produce before him for inspection any weight or
measure or any document, register or other
record relating thereto, omits or fails without any
reasonable excuse, so to do, shall be punished
with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees and for the second or subsequent
offence, with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year and also with fine.
Section 35 provides that whoever renders or
causes to be rendered, any service through
means other than the weight or measure or
numeration or in terms of any weight, measure
or number other than the standard weight or
measure, shall be punished with fine which shall
not be less than two thousand rupees but which
may extend to five thousand rupees and for the
second or subsequent offence, with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than three months but which may extend to one
year, or with fine, or with both.
Under section 36 whoever manufactures, packs,
imports, sells, distributes, delivers or otherwise
transfers, offers, exposes or possesses for sale,
or causes to be sold, distributed, delivered or
otherwise transferred, offered, exposed for sale
any pre-packaged commodity which does not
conform to the declarations on the package as
provided in this Act, shall be punished with fine
which may extend to twenty-five thousand
rupees, for the second offence, with fine which
may extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the
subsequent offence, with fine which shall not be
less than fifty thousand rupees but which may
extend to one lakh rupees or with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year or with
both. Whoever manufactures or packs or imports
or causes to be manufactured or packed or
imported, any pre-packaged commodity, with
error in pet quantity as may be prescribed shall
be punished with fine which shall not be less
than ten thousand rupees but which may extend
to fifty thousand rupees and for the second and
subsequent offence, with fine which may extend
to one lakh rupees or with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year or with both.
Section 42 provides for vexatious search and
empowers the Director, the Controller or any
legal metrology officer, exercising powers under
this Act or any rule made thereunder, who knows
that there are no reasonable grounds for so
doing, and yet searches, or causes to be
searched, any house, conveyance or place; or
searches any person; or seizes any weight;
measure or other movable property shall, for
every such offence, be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees or with both.
Penalty for counterfeiting or seal
Section 44 provides that whoever counterfeits
any seal specified by or under this Act or the
rules made thereunder, or sells or otherwise
disposes of any counterfeit seal or possesses
any counterfeit seal, or counterfeits or removes
or tampers with any stamp, specified by or under
this Act or rules made thereunder, or affixes the
stamp so removed on, or inserts the same into,
any other weight or measure, shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than six months but which may extend to
one year and for the second or subsequent
offence, with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than six months but which may
extend to five years.
Counterfeit shall have the meaning assigned to it
in section 28 of the Indian Penal Code.
A person is said to "counterfeit" who causes one
thing to resemble another thing, intending by
means of that resemblance to practice
deception, or knowing it to be likely that
deception will thereby be practiced.

Whoever obtains, by unlawful means, any seal
specified by or under this Act or the rules made
thereunder and uses, or causes to be used, any
such seal for making any stamp on any weight or
measure with a view to representing that the
stamp made by such seal is authorised by or
under this Act or the rules made thereunder shall
be punished with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than six months but which may
extend to one year and for the second or
subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than six months but
which may extend to five years.
Whoever, being in lawful possession of a seal
specified by or under this Act or the rules made
thereunder, uses, or causes to be used, such
seal without any lawful authority for such use,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall Explanation 1. It is not essential to
counterfeiting that the imitation should be exact.
Explanation 2. When a person causes one thing
to resemble another thing, and the resemblance
is such that a person might be deceived thereby,
it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved,
that the person so causing the one thing to
resemble the other thing intended by means of
that resemblance to practice deception or knew
it to be likely that deception would thereby be
practiced.

not be less than six months but which may
extend to one year and for the second or
subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than six months but
which may extend to five years.
Whoever sells or offers or exposes for sale or
otherwise disposes of any weight or measure
which, he knows or has reason to believe, bears
thereon a counterfeit stamp, shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than six months but which may extend to
one year and for the second or subsequent
offence, with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than six months but which may
extend to five years.
Compounding of offence
In terms of offence punishable under section 25,
sections 27 to 39, sections 45 to 47 either before
or after the institution of the prosecution, be
compounded, on payment for credit to the
Government of such sum as may be prescribed.
However, the Director or legal metrology officer
as may be specially authorised by him in this
behalf, may compound offences punishable
under section 25, sections 27 to 39, or any rule
made under sub-section (3) of section 52. The
Controller or legal metrology officer specially
authorised by him, may compound offences
punishable under section 25, sections 27 to 31,
sections 33 to 37, sections 45 to 47, and any
rule made under sub-section (3) of section 52:
Provided that such sum shall not, in any case,
exceed the maximum amount of the fine, which
may be imposed under this Act for the offence so
compounded.
Offences by companies
Section 49 provides that where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company, the
person, if any, who has been nominated to be in
charge of, and responsible to, the company for
the conduct of the business of the company
(hereinafter in this section referred to as a
person responsible); or where no person has
been nominated, every person who at the time
the offence was committed was in charge of, and
was responsible to, the company for the conduct
of the business of the company; and the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
However, such person shall not be liable to any
punishment, if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge and that he
exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
Any company may, by order in writing, authorise
any of its directors to exercise all such powers
and take all such steps as may be necessary or
expedient to prevent the commission by the
company of any offence under this Act and may
give notice to the Director or the concerned
Controller or any legal metrology officer
authorised in this behalf by such Controller in
such form and in such manner as may be
prescribed, that it has nominated such director
as the person responsible, along with the written
consent of such director for being so nominated.
It may be noted that where a company has
different establishments or branches or different,
units in any establishment or branch, different
persons may be nominated under this subsection
in relation to different establishments or
branches or units and the person nominated in
relation to any establishment, branch or unit shall
be deemed to be the person responsible in
respect of such establishment, branch or unit.

Where an offence under the Act has been
committed by a company and it is proved that
the offence has been committed with the consent
or connivance of, or is attributable to the neglect
on the part of, any director, manager, secretary
or other officer, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Where any company is convicted under the Act
for contravention of any of the provisions thereof,
it shall be competent for the court convicting the
company
to cause the name and place of business of the
company,                                             Explanation.-
nature of the contravention, the fact that the
company has (a) "company" means any body
been so convicted and such other particulars as
the court corporate and includes a 'firm or may
consider to be appropriate in the circumstances
of other association of individuals;
the case, to be published at the expense of the
company                                              and
in such newspaper or in such other manner as
the court may direct. No publication shall be
made until the period (b) "director", in relation to
a firm, for preferring an appeal against the orders
of the court means a partner in the firm but has
expired without any appeal having been
preferred, or excludes nominated directors, such
an appeal, having been preferred, has been
disposed honorary directors, Government of.
The expenses of any publication shall be
recoverable nominated directors.
from the company as if it were a fine imposed by
the court.
Power of the Central government to make rules
Section 52 of the Act empowers the Central
Government to make rules, by notification, for
carrying out the provisions of the Act.
In making any rule the Central Government may
provide that a breach thereof shall be punishable
with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees.
Every rule made by the Central Government
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Power of State government to make rule
Section 53 empowers the State Government to
make rules, by notification, and after consultation
with the Central Government, to carry out the
provisions of the Act.
In making any rule under this section, the State
Government may provide that a breach thereof
shall be punishable with fine which may extend
to five thousand rupees. The power to make
rules under this section shall be subject to the
condition of the rules being made after previous
publication in Official Gazette. Every rule made
under this section shall, as soon as may be after
it is made, be laid before each House of State
Legislature, where there are two Houses and
where there is one House of State Legislature,
before that House.
THE ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES ACT, 1955
The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 was
enacted to regulate the production, supply and
distribution of, and trade and commerce in,
certain commodities which are declared as
essential commodities and specified in the
Schedule to that Act.
Schedule to the Act lists out following
commodities: (1) drugs: The explanation clarifies
that for the purposes of this Schedule, "drugs"
has the meaning assigned to it in clause (b) of
Section 3 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940;
(2) fertilizer, whether inorganic, organic or mixed;
(3) foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oils;
(4) hank yarn made wholly from cotton; (5)
petroleum and petroleum products; (6) raw jute
and jute textiles; (7) (i) seeds of food-crops and
seeds of fruits and vegetables; (ii) seeds of
cattle fodder; and (iii) jute seeds.
The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 was
enacted to ensure easy availability of essential
commodities to the consumers and to protect
them from exploitation by unscrupulous traders.
The Act provides for regulation and control of
production, distribution and pricing of
commodities, which are declared as essential for
maintaining or increasing supplies or for securing
their equitable distribution and availability at fair
prices. The Essential Commodities Act is being
implemented by the State Governments/UT
Administrations by availing of the delegated
powers under the Act. The State Governments/
UT Administrations have issued various Control
Orders for regulation, production and distribution
of Essential Commodities such as food grains,
edible oils, pulses kerosene, sugar etc. The
Central Government regularly monitors the
action taken by State Governments/ UT
Administrations to implement the provisions of
the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. The items
declared as essential commodities under the
Essential Commodities Act, 1955 are reviewed
from time to time in the light of liberalized
economic policies in consultation with the
Ministries/ Departments administering the
essential commodities and particularly with
regard to their production, demand, and supply.
The Preamble to the Act says that it is an Act to
provide in the interest of the general public for
the control of the production, supply and
distribution of, and trade and commerce in,
certain commodities. The dominant object and
intendment of the Act is to secure equitable
distribution and availability at fair prices of
essential commodities in the interest of the
general public. The interest of the general public
necessarily connotes the interest of the
consuming public and not the interest of the
dealer (1958 Andh. LT587).
The Central Government having been vested
with power under Section 3 can issue order in
the following circumstances providing for
regulating or prohibiting the production, supply
and distribution of essential commodities and
trade and commerce therein: (i) when it is
necessary or expedient for maintaining or
increasing supplies of any essential commodity;
(ii) for securing the equitable distribution and
availability of essential commodities at fair price;
or (iii) for securing any essential commodity for
the defence of India or the efficient conduct of
military operations.
The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 envisages
two independent proceedings against a person
charged with contravention of the provisions of
the Act. Under the Act, the Collector can
confiscate the seized commodity. Confiscation of
essential commodities is a sharp weapon which
the Act has provided to the Central Government
under of the Act. Any person aggrieved by an
order of confiscation may appeal to the State
Government.
The Act declares that notwithstanding anything
contained in the Criminal Procedure Code, 1971,
every offence punishable under the Act shall be
cognizable. A cognizable offence is one, where,
under the Criminal Procedure Code or any other
law in force, a police officer may arrest a person
without a warrant. Court can take cognizance of
any offence punishable under the Act, the
following three conditions must be satisfied, viz.
(i) there must be a report in writing, (ii) the report
must be made by a public servant, as defined in
Section 21 of Indian Penal Code, or any
aggrieved person or any recognised consumer
association.
The Act provides that if the person contravening
an order under Section 3 is, a company, every
person who, at the time of the contravention,
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the
company for the conduct of the business of the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
contravention, and shall be liable to be punished
accordingly. In such cases, the company itself is
also liable to be proceeded against. Any such
person, can, however, escape liability if he
proves that the contravention took place without
his knowledge or that he exercised all due
diligence to prevent it. It may be noted that the
term 'company' as used above, refers to
anybody corporate, and even includes a firm or
other association or individuals. In the case of a
firm, the term 'Director' would mean a partner in
the firm.
LESSON ROUND-UP
l Weights and measures may be ranked among
the necessaries of life to every individual of
human society. They enter into the economical
arrangements and daily concerns of every
family.
l Legal metrology Act, 2009 intend to establish
and enforce standards of weights and measures,
regulate trade and commerce in weights,
measures and other goods which are sold or
distributed by weight, measure or number and
for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
l "Legal Metrology" means that part of metrology
which treats units of weighment and
measurement, methods of weighment and
measurement and weighing and measuring
instruments, in relation to the mandatory
technical and legal requirements which have the
object of ensuring public guarantee from the
point of view of security and accuracy of the
weighments and measurements.
l Every unit of weight or measure to be in
accordance with the metric system based on the
international system of units.
l A person shall not manufacture, pack, sell,
import, distribute, deliver, offer, expose or
possess for sale any pre-packaged commodity
unless such package is in such standard
quantities or number and bears thereon such
declarations and particulars in such manner as
may be prescribed.
l Any advertisement mentioning the retail sale
price of a pre-packaged commodity shall contain
a declaration as to the net quantity or number of
the commodity contained in the package in such
form and manner as may be prescribed.
l Legal Metrology Act provides for penalty for use
of non-standard Weight or measure.
l Label means any written, marked, stamped,
printed or graphic matter affixed to, or appearing
upon any pre-packaged commodity.
l A person is said to "counterfeit" who causes
one thing to resemble another thing, intending
by means of that resemblance to practice
deception, or knowing it to be likely that
deception will thereby be practiced.
l Legal Metrology Act empowers the Central
Government and State Governments to make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
l The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 was
enacted to regulate the production, supply and
distribution of, and trade and commerce in,
certain commodities which are declared as
essential commodities and specified in the
Schedule to that Act.

TEST YOURSELF
(These are meant for re-capitulation only.
Answers to these questions are not to be
submitted for evaluation)
1. What are the objectives of Legal Metrology
Act, 2009?
2. Enumerate the powers and functions of
Controller and Legal Metrology Officer?
3. Write short note on Counterfeit.
4. Every non-standard weight and measure used
in the course of trade is liable to be forfeited
Comment.
5. Briefly explain the provision regarding
declaration on pre-packed commodities.
LIST OF FURTHER READINgS
? Bare Act - Legal Metrology Act, 2009 and rules
made thereunder. ? The Legal Metrology Act,
2009 - Virag Gupta & Gaurav Pathak
OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDINg
WEbSITES / vIDEO LINKS)
? https://consumeraffairs.nic.in/acts-and-
rules/legal-metrology/the-legal-metrology-act-
2009




INTRODUCTION
Real estate sector plays a catalytic role in
fulfilling the needs and demand for housing and
infrastructure in the country and is an important
pillar of the economy. While this sector has
grown significantly in recent years, it has been
largely unregulated, with absence of
professionalism and standardisation and lack of
adequate consumer protection. It has no sectoral
regulator like there are for other specific sectors
like insurance, telecom, stock markets etc.
History is witness to the fact that whenever
sectoral regulators like SEBI, IRDAI, TRAI etc
have been formed, they have helped in
deepening the market and made it more robust.
Though the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 is
available as a forum to the buyers in the real
estate market, the recourse is only curative and
is not adequate to address all the concerns of
buyers and promoters in that sector. The lack of
standardisation has been a constraint to the
healthy and orderly growth of industry.
Therefore, since more than a decade the need
for regulating the sector was being emphasised
in various forums.
In view of the above, Parliament enacted the
Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act,
2016 which aims at protecting the rights and
interests of consumers and promotion of
uniformity and standardization of business
practices and transactions in the real estate
sector. It attempts to balance the interests of
consumers and promoters by imposing certain
responsibilities on both. It seeks to establish
symmetry of information between the promoter
and purchaser, transparency of contractual
conditions, set minimum standards of
accountability and a fast-track dispute resolution
mechanism.
This Act will be put in operation just like the
Motor Vehicles Act passed by the Central
Government, pursuant to which respective State
Governments ("SG") and Union Territories ('UT")
are required to notify their own Rules, which
would be in the lines of the Central Act and
accordingly administer their own State Rules.
Accordingly, every SG and UT are to required to
promulgate their own Real Estate Rules which
would be based on the lines of the central Real
Estate (Regulation and Development) Act 2016,
and establish a Real Estate Regulatory Authority
("RERA") pursuant to the Rules, which will
administer the respective Real Estate Rules of
the State or UT.
Importance of a house in a developing country
like India can be gauged from the data which
shows that about more than 77% of total assets
of an average Indian household are held in real
estate and it's the single largest investment of an
individual in his lifetime. The real estate in India
has a peculiar feature. The buyer borrows
money to pay for a house and simultaneously
plays the role of a financer as building projects
collect money upfront and this puts the buyer in a
very vulnerable position-the weakest stakeholder
with a high financial exposure. The amendment
to the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2018
recognized the home buyers as financial
creditors.

In the case of M/s. Newtech Promoters and
Developers Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of UP & Ors. Etc,
Civil Appeal No(s). 6745-6749 of 2021 (Arising
out of SLP (Civil) No(s). 3711-3715 of 2021)
judgement dated 11th November, 2021 Supreme
Court of India inter-alia observed that:
It was introduced with an object to ensure
greater accountability towards consumers, to
significantly reduce frauds & delays and also the
current high transaction costs, and to balance
the interests of consumers and promoters by
imposing certain responsibilities on both, and to
bring transparency of the contractual conditions,
set minimum standards of accountability and a
fast track dispute resolution mechanism. It also
proposes to induct professionalism and
standardization in the sector, thus paving the
way for accelerated growth and investments in
the long run.
To meet out different nature of exigencies, it was
noticed by the Parliament that Pan India, large
number of real estate projects where the
allottees did not get possession for years
together and complaints being filed before
different forums including under the Consumer
Protection Act has failed to deliver adequate/
satisfactory results to the consumer/allottees and
their life savings is locked in and sizable sections
of allottees had invested their hardearned
money, money obtained through loans or
financial institutions with the belief that they will
be able to get a roof in the form of their
apartments/flats/unit.
At the given time, there was no law regulating
the real estate sector, development
works/obligations of promoter and allottee, it was
badly felt that such of the ongoing projects to
which completion certificate has not been issued
must be brought within the fold of the Act 2016 in
securing the interests of allottees, promoters,
real estate agents in its best possible way
obviously, within the parameters of law. Merely
because enactment as prayed is made
retroactive in its operation, it cannot be said to
be either violative of Articles 14 or 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution of India. To the contrary, the
Parliament indeed has the power to legislate
even retrospectively to take into its fold the pre-
existing contract and rights executed between
the parties in the larger public interest.
SALIENT FEATURES OF THE ACT
* Establish the Real Estate Regulatory Authority
for regulation and promotion of the real estate
sector.
* Ensure sale of plot, apartment of building, as
the case may be, or sale of real estate project, in
an efficient and transparent manner.
* Ensure protection the interest of consumers in
the real estate sector.
* Establish an adjudicating mechanism for
speedy dispute redressal and also to establish
the Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals from the
decisions, directions or orders of the Real Estate
Regulatory Authority (RERA).
* Regulates transactions between buyers and
promoters of residential real estate projects.
                                                        Residential real
                                                        estate projects,
                                                        with some
* Establishes state level regulatory authorities        exceptions, need
called Real Estate Regulatory Authorities               to be registered
(RERAs).                                         ?      with RERAs.
* Promoters cannot book or offer these projects
for sale without registering them. Real estate
agents dealing in these projects also need to
register with RERAs.
                                                               These include the
                                                               site and layout
                                                               plan, and
* Registration of the project, the promoter must               schedule for
upload details of the project on the website of                completion of the
the RERA.                                                      real estate project.
                                                           ?
* Amount collected from buyers for a project
must be maintained in a separate bank account
and must only be used for construction of that
project.
* Right to Legal Representation on behalf of
client by Company Secretaries or chartered
accountants or cost accountants or legal
practitioners.
* Imposes stringent penalty on promoter, real
estate agent and also prescribes imprisonment.
ADvANTAgES OF RERA (REAL ESTATE
REgULATION & DEvLOPMENT ACT)

IMPORTANT DEFINITIONS
RERA has brought in uniformity in definitions for
important components of real estate, like, "carpet
area", "common areas" etc. which will prevent
malpractices like changes in area, specifications
etc.
In this Act, Section 2 provides following
definitions with opening words...unless the
context otherwise requires:-
Advertisement means any document described
or issued as advertisement through any medium
and includes any notice, circular or other
documents or publicity in any form, informing
persons about a real estate project, or offering
for sale of a plot, building or apartment or inviting
persons to purchase in any manner such as plot,
building or apartment or to make advances or
deposits for such purposes. {Section 2(b)}
Agreement for sale means an agreement
entered into between the promoter and the
allottee. {Section 2(c)}
Allottee in relation to a real estate project, means
the person to whom a plot, apartment or building,
as the case may be, has been allotted, sold
(whether as freehold or leasehold) or otherwise
transferred by the promoter, and includes the
person who subsequently acquires the said
allotment through sale, transfer or otherwise but
does not include a person to whom such plot,
apartment or building, as the case may be, is
given on rent. {Section 2(d)}
In Pioneer Urban Land and Infrastructure Limited
vs. Union of India, the Supreme Court upheld the
constitutional validity of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code (Second Amendment) Act,
2018, which included 'real estate allottees' within
the definition of 'financial creditors' under Section
5(8)(f) of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code.
Apartment whether called block, chamber,
dwelling unit, flat, office, showroom, shop,
godown, premises, suit, tenement, unit or by any
other name, means a separate and self-
contained part of any immovable property,
including one or more rooms or enclosed
spaces, located on one or more floors or any part
thereof, in a building or on a plot of land, used or
intended to be used for any residential or
commercial use such as residence, office, shop,
showroom or godown or for carrying on any
business, occupation, profession or trade, or for
any other type of use ancillary to the purpose
specified. {Section 2(e)}
Building includes any structure or erection or part
of a structure or erection which is intended to be
used for residential, commercial or for the
purpose of any business, occupation, profession
or trade, or for any other related purposes.
{Section 2( j)}
Carpet area means the net usable floor area of
an apartment, excluding the area covered by the
external walls, areas under services shafts,
exclusive balcony or verandah area and
exclusive open terrace area, but includes the
area covered by the internal partition walls of the
apartment. {Section 2(k)}
Explanation.- The expression "exclusive balcony
or verandah area" means the area of the balcony
or verandah, as the case may be, which is
appurtenant to the net usable floor area of an
apartment, meant for the exclusive use of the
allottee; and "exclusive open terrace area"
means the area of open terrace which is
appurtenant to the net usable floor area of an
apartment, meant for the exclusive use of the
allottee;
Commencement certificate means the
commencement certificate or the building permit
or the construction permit, by whatever name
called issued by the competent authority to allow
or permit the promoter to begin development
works on an immovable property, as per the
sanctioned plan. {Section 2(m)}
Common areas mean-
(i) the entire land for the real estate project or
where the project is developed in phases and
registration under this Act is sought for a phase,
the entire land for that phase;
(ii) the stair cases, lifts, staircase and lift lobbies,
fire escapes, and common entrances and exits
of buildings; (iii) the common basements,
terraces, parks, play areas, open parking areas
and common storage spaces;
(iv) the premises for the lodging of persons
employed for the management of the property
including accommodation for watch and ward
staffs or for the lodging of community service
personnel;
(v) installations of central services such as
electricity, gas, water and sanitation, air-
conditioning and incinerating, system for water
conservation and renewable energy;
(vi) the water tanks, sumps, motors, fans,
compressors, ducts and all apparatus connected
with installations for common use;
(vii) all community and commercial facilities as
provided in the real estate project;
(viii) all other portion of the project necessary or
convenient for its maintenance, safety, etc., and
in common use. {Section 2(n)}
Company means a company incorporated and
registered under the Companies Act, 2013 and
includes,-
(i) a corporation established by or under any
Central Act or State Act;
(ii) a development authority or any public
authority established by the Government in this
behalf under any law for the time being in force.
{Section 2(o)}
Competent authority means the local authority or
any authority created or established under any
law for the time being in force by the appropriate
Government which exercises authority over land
under its jurisdiction, and has powers to give
permission for development of such immovable
property. {Section 2(p)}
Completion certificate means the completion
certificate, or such other certificate, by whatever
name called, issued by the competent authority
certifying that the real estate project has been
developed according to the sanctioned plan,
layout plan and specifications, as approved by
the competent authority under the local laws.
{Section 2(q)}
Interest means the rates of interest payable by
the promoter or the allottee, as the case may be.
{Section 2(za)}.
Explanation.-
(i) the rate of interest chargeable from the
allottee by the promoter, in case of default, shall
be equal to the rate of interest which the
promoter shall be liable to pay the allottee, in
case of default;
(ii) the interest payable by the promoter to the
allottee shall be from the date the promoter
received the amount or any part thereof till the
date the amount or part thereof and interest
thereon is refunded, and the interest payable by
the, allottee to the promoter shall be from the
date the allottee defaults in payment to the
promoter till the date it is paid.
Internal development works means roads,
footpaths, water supply, sewers, drains, parks,
tree planting, street lighting, provision for
community buildings and for treatment and
disposal of sewage and sullage water, solid
waste management and disposal, water
conservation, energy management, fire
protection and fire safety requirements, social
infrastructure such as educational health and
other public amenities or any other work in a
project for its benefit, as per sanctioned plans.
{Section 2(zb)}
Local authority means the Municipal Corporation
or Municipality or Panchayats or any other Local
Body constituted under any law for the time
being in force for providing municipal services or
basic services, as the case may be, in respect of
areas under its jurisdiction. {Section 2(zc)}
Occupancy certificate means the occupancy
certificate, or such other certificate by whatever
name called, issued by the competent authority
permitting occupation of any building, as
provided under local laws, which has provision
for civic infrastructure such as water, sanitation
and electricity. {Section 2(zf)} "Person" includes,-
(i) an individual;
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;
(iii) a company;
(iv) a firm under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932
or the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, as
the case may be;
(v) a competent authority;
                                                       a co-
                                                       operative
                                                       society
                                                       registered
                                                       under any law
                                                       relating to co-
                                                       operative
                                                       societies; any
                                                       such other
                                                       entity as the
                                                       appropriate
                                                       Government
                                                       may, by
                                                       notification,
                                                       specify in this
                                                       behalf.
(vi) an association of persons or a body of            {Section
individuals whether incorporated or not; (vii)         2(zg)}
Planning area means a planning area or a
development area or a local planning area or a
regional development plan area, by whatever
name called, or any other area specified as such
by the appropriate Government or any
competent authority and includes any area
designated by the appropriate Government or
the competent authority to be a planning area for
future planned development, under the law
relating to Town and Country Planning for the
time being in force and as revised from time to
time. {Section 2(zh)}
Prospectus means any document described or
issued as a prospectus or any notice, circular, or
other document offering for sale or any real
estate project or inviting any person to make
advances or deposits for such purposes.
{Section 2(zl)}
Appropriate Government
Section 2(g) of the Act defines 'Appropriate
Government' to mean as follows:
For the Union territory without Legislature,
                                                                         Central
                                                       ?                 Government;
For the Union territory of Puducherry,
                                                                         Union Territory
                                                       ?                 Government;
For the Union territory of Delhi,
                                                          Central Ministry of
                                                          Urban
                                                      ?   Development;
For the State,
                                                          State
                                                      ?   Government.
Responsibilities of the Appropriate government
(a) As per section 84 of the Act, the appropriate
Government is required to notify Rules for the
implementation of the Act.
(b) As per section 20 of the Act, the appropriate
Government is required to establish the
Regulatory Authority.
(c) As per section 43 of the Act, the appropriate
Government is required to establish the
Appellate Tribunal.
(d) The Chairperson and Members of the
Regulatory Authority and the Members of the
Appellate Tribunal are required to be appointed
based on recommendations of a Selection
Committee, thus the appropriate Government is
required to constitute the Selection Committee.
(e) As per section 28 and section 51, the
appropriate Government is required to appoint
officers and other employees of Regulatory
Authority and the Appellate Tribunal.
(f) As per section 41, the Central Government
(i.e. the Ministry of HUPA) is required to
establish the Central Advisory Council.
(g) As per section 75, the appropriate
Government is required to constitute a 'Real
Estate Regulatory Fund'.
REgISTRATION OF REAL ESTATE PROJECT
AND REgISTRATION OF REAL ESTATE
AgENTS
Many developers across India follow a common
practice of pre-lauching a project without
securing requisite approvals for the project from
the local authorities, which is termed as "soft
launch", "pre-launch" etc. Buyers also gets
tapped into this opportunity as they get
discounted prices during the pre-launches
period. But if it is from a developer who is
unscrupulous or a fly by night operator, then it
carries a great risk. Hence, to plug this gap,
registration of every project with the regulatory
authority has been made mandatory before it is
launched for sale and for registration, the basic
pre-requisite is that the developer must have all
the requisite approvals. Thus, the buyer is
protected as the project is ring-fenced from the
vagaries of non-approvals or delays in approvals
which are one of the major causes of delay for
the project.
Prior Registration of Real Estate project with
Real Estate Regulatory Authority (Section 3)
A promoter shall not advertise, market, book, sell
or offer for sale, or invite persons to purchase in
any manner any plot, apartment or building, as
the case may be, in any real estate project or
part of it, in any planning area, without
registering the real estate project with the Real
Estate Regulatory Authority established under
section 20 of the Act.
It may be noted that -
Promoter means, -
(i) a person who constructs or causes to be
constructed an independent building or a
building consisting of apartments, or converts an
existing building or a part thereof into
apartments, for the purpose of selling all or some
of the apartments to other persons and includes
his assignees; or
(ii) a person who develops land into a project,
whether or not the person also constructs
structures on any of the plots, for the purpose of
selling to other persons all or some of the plots in
the said project, whether with or without
structures thereon; or
(iii) any development authority or any other
public body in respect of allottees of-
(a) buildings or apartments, as the case may be,
constructed by such authority or body on lands
owned by them or placed at their disposal by the
Government; or
(b) plots owned by such authority or body or
placed at their disposal by the Government, for
the purpose of selling all or some of the
apartments or plots; or
(iv) an apex State level co-operative housing
finance society and a primary co-operative
housing society which constructs apartments or
buildings for its members or in respect of the
allottees of such apartments or buildings; or
(v) any other person who acts himself as a
builder, coloniser, contractor, developer, estate
developer or by any other name or claims to be
acting as the holder of a power of attorney from
the owner of the land on which the building or
apartment is constructed or plot is developed for
sale; or
(vi) such other person who constructs any
building or apartment for sale to the general
public.
Explanation.- where the person who constructs
or converts a building into apartments or
develops a plot for sale and the persons who
sells apartments or plots are different persons,
both of them shall be deemed to be the
promoters and shall be jointly liable as such for
the functions and responsibilities specified, under
this Act or the rules and regulations made there
under. {Section 2(zk)}
The very purpose and object of enacting the Act,
2016 was to safeguard the interest of the home
buyers from the project which was launched by
the promoter and was not completed in time.
The legislature does not leave any individual,
association, or organization as an exception to
the word 'promoter'. The use of the word 'a
person' at the outset of the definition clause of
the word 'promoter' clearly signifies that it
embraces all types of individuals, associations,
corporations, and authorities dealing in the real
estate sector and does not exclude any
organization though it may be "no profit no loss"
organization but is registered under the Act. (Air
Force Naval Housing Board Air Force Station vs.
U.P. RERA and others)
Real estate project means the development of a
building or a building consisting of apartments, or
converting an existing building or a part thereof
into apartments, or the development of land into
plots or apartment, as the case may be, for the
purpose of selling all or some of the said
apartments or plots or building, as the case may
be, and includes the common areas, the
development works, all improvements and
structures thereon, and all easement, rights and
appurtenances belonging thereto. {Section 2(zn)}
The projects that are ongoing on the date of
commencement of this Act and for which the
completion certificate has not been issued, the
promoter shall make an application to the
Authority for registration of the said project within
a period of three months from the date of
commencement of this Act.
Authority in the interest of allottees, for projects
which are developed beyond the planning area
but with the requisite permission of the local
authority, it may, by order, direct the promoter of
such project to register with the Authority, and
the provisions of this Act or the rules and
regulations made there under, shall apply to
such projects from that stage of registration
where the real estate project is to be developed
in phases, every such phase shall be considered
a stand alone real estate project, and the
promoter shall obtain registration under this Act
for each phase separately.
Projects exempt from the ambit of the Act
The following projects do not require to be
registered under the Act:
(a) area of land proposed to be developed does
not exceed 500 Sq. Meters or No. of apartments
proposed to be developed does not exceed eight
inclusive of all phases:
Provided that, if the appropriate Government
considers it necessary, it may, reduce the
threshold below five hundred square meters or
eight apartments, as the case may be, inclusive
of all phases, for exemption from registration
under this Act;
(b) where the promoter has received completion
certificate for a real estate project prior to
commencement of this Act;
(c) for the purpose of renovation or repair or re-
development which does not involve marketing,
advertising selling or new allotment of any
apartment, plot or building, as the case may be,
under the real estate project.
In the case of M/s. Newtech Promoters and
Developers Pvt. Ltd. Vs. State of UP & Ors. etc,
Civil Appeal No(s). 6745-6749 of 2021 [Arising
out of SLP (Civil) No(s). 3711-3715 of 2021]
Supreme Court of India inter- alia observed that
from the scheme of the Act 2016, its application
is retroactive in character and it can safely be
observed that the projects already completed or
to which the completion certificate has been
granted are not under its fold and therefore,
vested or accrued rights, if any, in no manner are
affected. At the same time, it will apply after
getting the ongoing projects and future projects
registered under Section 3 to prospectively
follow the mandate of the Act 2016.
Application for Registration of Real Estate
Projects (Section 4)
Every promoter shall make an application to the
Authority for registration of the real estate project
in such form, manner, within such time and
accompanied by such fee as may be specified
by the regulations made by the Authority.

The promoter shall enclose the following
documents along with the application, namely:-
(a) a brief details of his enterprise including its
name, registered address, type of enterprise
(proprietorship, societies, partnership,
companies, competent authority), and the
particulars of registration, and the names and
photographs of the promoter;
(b) a brief detail of the projects launched by him,
in the past five years, whether already completed
or being developed, as the case may be,
including the current status of the said projects,
any delay in its completion, details of cases
pending, details of type of land and payments
pending;
(c) an authenticated copy of the approvals and
commencement certificate from the competent
authority obtained in accordance with the laws
as may be applicable for the real estate project
mentioned in the application, and where the
project is proposed to be developed in phases,
an authenticated copy of the approvals and
commencement certificate from the competent
authority for each of such phases;
(d) the sanctioned plan, layout plan and
specifications of the proposed project or the
phase thereof, and the whole project as
sanctioned by the competent authority;
(e) the plan of development works to be
executed in the proposed project and the
proposed facilities to be provided thereof
including firefighting facilities, drinking water
facilities, emergency evacuation services, use of
renewable energy;
(f) the location details of the project, with clear
demarcation of land dedicated for the project
along with its boundaries including the latitude
and longitude of the end points of the project;
(g) proforma of the allotment letter, agreement
for sale, and the conveyance deed proposed to
be signed with the allottees;
(h) the number, type and the carpet area of
apartments for sale in the project along with the
area of the exclusive balcony or verandah areas
and the exclusive open terrace areas apartment
with the apartment, if any;
(i) the number and areas of garage for sale in
the project;
(j) the names and addresses of his real estate
agents, if any, for the proposed project;
(k) the names and addresses of the contractors,
architect, structural engineer, if any and other
persons concerned with the development of the
proposed project;
(l) a declaration, supported by an affidavit, which
shall be signed by the promoter or any person
authorised by the promoter, stating:-
A. that he has a legal title to the land on which
the development is proposed along with legally
valid documents with authentication of such title,
if such land is owned by another person;
B. that the land is free from all encumbrances, or
as the case may be details of the encumbrances
on such land including any rights, title, interest or
name of any party in or over such land along with
details;
C. the time period within which he undertakes to
complete the project or phase thereof, as the
case may be;
D. that seventy per-cent of the amounts realised
for the real estate project from the allottees, from
time to time, shall be deposited in a separate
account to be maintained in a scheduled bank to
cover the cost of construction and the land cost
and shall be used only for that purpose.
The promoter shall withdraw the amounts from
the separate account, to cover the cost of the
project, in proportion to the percentage of
completion of the project. The amounts from the
separate account shall be withdrawn by the
promoter after it is certified by an engineer, an
architect and a chartered accountant in practice
that the withdrawal is in proportion to the
percentage of completion of the project.
The promoter shall get his accounts audited
within six months after the end of every financial
year by a chartered accountant in practice, and
shall produce a statement of accounts duly
certified and signed by such chartered
accountant and it shall be verified during the
audit that the amounts collected for a particular
project have been utilised for the project and the
withdrawal has been in compliance with the
proportion to the percentage of completion of the
project.
The promoter shall take all the pending
approvals on time, from the competent
authorities and furnished such other documents
as may be prescribed by the rules or regulations
made under.
The Authority shall operationalise a web based
online system for submitting applications for
registration of projects within a period of one
year from the date of its establishment.
granting of Registration by the Authority (Section
5)
On receipt of the application, the Authority shall
within a period of thirty days-
(a) grant registration subject to the provisions of
the Act and the rules and regulations made
thereunder. A
registration number, including a Login Id and
password to the applicant for accessing the
website of the Authority and to create his web
page and to fill therein the details of the
proposed project; or
(b) reject the application for reasons to be
recorded in writing, if such application does not
conform to the provisions of this Act or the rules
or regulations made thereunder. Application shall
not be rejected unless the applicant has been
given an opportunity of being heard in the
matter.
If the Authority fails to grant the registration or
reject the application, as provided above, the
project shall be deemed to have been registered,
and the Authority shall within a period of seven
days of the expiry of the said period of thirty
days, provide a registration number and a Login
Id and password to the promoter for accessing
the website of the Authority and to create his
web page and to fill therein the details of the
proposed project.
The registration granted shall be valid for a
period declared by the promoter for completion
of the project or phase thereof, as the case may
be.
Extension of Registration (Section 6)
Delay in handing over of projects by the
developer within the stipulated time frame has
been a major woe of the buyers and hence has
been a major trigger for promulgation of this Act.
Hence, at the time of registration, a developer
has to specify a time line during which he will
complete and handover the project to the buyer.
The timeline is very sacrosanct because if he
fails to do so within the stated time, then there
are rigorous provisions in the Act as prescribed
in section 7 & 8 whereby his registration would
be revoked and his project would be usurped by
the Regulator. Though as per section 6, an
extension of registration may be granted at the
sole discretion of the Regulator due to Force
Majeure conditions or if there are reasonable
circumstances which merit extension.
The registration granted may be extended by the
Authority on an application made by the
promoter due to force majeure, in such form and
on payment of such fee as may be specified by
regulations made by the Authority.
Force majeure shall mean a case of war, flood,
drought, fire, cyclone, earthquake or any other
calamity caused by nature affecting the regular
development of the real estate project.
The Authority may in reasonable circumstances,
without default on the part of the promoter,
based on the facts of each case, and for reasons
to be recorded in writing, extend the registration
granted to a project for such time as it considers
necessary, which shall, in aggregate, not exceed
a period of one year.
Application for extension of registration shall not
be rejected unless the applicant has been given
an opportunity of being heard in the matter.

Revocation of Registration (Section 7)
The Authority may, on receipt of a complaint or
suo moto in this behalf or on the
recommendation of the competent authority,
revoke the registration granted, after being
satisfied that-
(a) the promoter makes default in doing anything
required by or under this Act or the rules or the
regulations made there under;
                                                                        the promoter is
                                                                        involved in any
(b) the promoter violates any of the terms or                           kind of unfair
conditions of the approval given by the                                 practice or
competent authority;                                  (c)               irregularities.
The term "unfair practice means" a practice
which, for the purpose of promoting the sale or
development of any real estate project adopts
any unfair method or unfair or deceptive practice
including any of the following practices, namely:-
                                                      (i) falsely
                                                      represents
                                                      that the
                                                      services are
                                                      of a particular
A. the practice of making any statement, whetherstandard or
in writing or by visible representation which,-       grade;
(ii) represents that the promoter has approval or
affiliation which such promoter does not have;
(iii) makes a false or misleading representation
concerning the services;
B. the promoter permits the publication of any
advertisement or prospectus whether in any
newspaper or otherwise of services that are not
intended to be offered; (d) the promoter indulges
in any fraudulent practices.
The registration granted to the promoter shall not
be revoked unless the Authority has given to the
promoter not less than thirty days' notice, in
writing, stating the grounds on which it is
proposed to revoke the registration, and has
considered any cause shown by the promoter
within the period of that notice against the
proposed revocation.
The Authority may, instead of revoking the
registration, permit it to remain in force subject to
such further terms and conditions as it thinks fit
to impose in the interest of the allottees, and any
such terms and conditions so imposed shall be
binding upon the promoter.
The Authority, upon the revocation of the
registration-
* Debar the promoter from accessing its website
in relation to that project and specify his name in
the list
                                                      ? Facilitate
                                                      the remaining
                                                      development
                                                      works to be
                                                      carried out in
of defaulters and display his photograph on its accordance
website and also inform the other Real Estate         with the
Regulatory Authority in other States and Union provisions of
territories about such revocation or registration; section 8;
* Direct the bank holding the project back
account to freeze the account, and thereafter
take such
further necessary actions, including consequent
de-freezing of the said account, towards
facilitating the remaining development works in
accordance with the provisions of section 8;
* To protect the interest of allottees or in the
public interest, issue such directions as it may
deem necessary.
Obligation of Authority consequent upon Lapse
of or on Revocation of Registration (Section 8)
Upon lapse of the registration or on revocation of
the registration under the Act, the authority, may
consult the appropriate Government to take such
action as it may deem fit including the carrying
out of the remaining development works by
competent authority or by the association of
allottees or in any other manner, as may be
determined by the Authority.
The direction, decision or order of the Authority
shall not take effect until the expiry of the period
of appeal provided under the provisions of the
Act.
In case of revocation of registration of a project
under the Act, the association of allottees shall
have the first right of refusal for carrying out of
the remaining development works.
Registration of Real Estate Agents
Real estate agent means any person, who
negotiates or acts on behalf of one person in a
transaction of transfer of his plot, apartment or
building, as the case may be, in a real estate
project, by way of sale, with another person or
transfer of plot, apartment or building, as the
case may be, of any other person to him and
receives remuneration or fees or any other
charges for his services whether as commission
or otherwise and includes a person who
introduces, through any medium, prospective
buyers and sellers to each other for negotiation
for sale or purchase of plot, apartment or
building, as the case may be, and includes
property dealers, brokers, middlemen by
whatever name called. {Section 2(zm)}
Real estate broking is one of the easiest
business in India as there are no specific
qualification or experience requirements and
also there is no code of practice which sets
accountability, transparency and professional
benchmarks. Hence, there are thousands of
non-professional agents/ brokers in every city
operating without any accountability. Hence, to
bring in transparency and accountability, agents
have also been covered under the ambit of
RERA and registration requirement has been
mandatory for them as per section 9 of the Act.
Without obtaining registration, real estate agent
shall not facilitate the sale or purchase of or act
on behalf of any person to facilitate the sale or
purchase of any plot, apartment or building, as
the case may be, in a real estate project or part
of it, being the part of the real estate project
registered, being sold by the promoter in any
planning area.
Every real estate agent shall make an
application to the Authority for registration in
such form, manner, within such time and
accompanied by such fee and documents as
may be prescribed.
The Authority shall, within such period, in such
manner and upon satisfying itself of the fulfilment
of such conditions, as may be prescribed-
(a) grant a single registration to the real estate
agent for the entire State of Union territory, as
the case may be;
(b) reject the application for reasons to be
recorded in writing, if such application does not
conform to the provisions of the Act or the rules
or regulations made there under.
Application shall not be rejected unless the
applicant has been given an opportunity of being
heard in the matter.
Whereon the completion of the period prescribed
under the Act, if the applicant does not receive
any communication about the deficiencies in his
application or the rejection of his application, he
shall be deemed to have been registered.
Every real estate agent who is registered as per
the provisions of this Act or the rules and
regulations made there under, shall be granted a
registration number by the Authority, which shall
be quoted by the real estate agent in every sale
facilitated by him under this Act.
Every registration shall be valid for such period
as may be prescribed, and shall be renewable
for a period in such manner and on payment of
such fee as may be prescribed.
Where any real estate agent who has been
granted registration under this Act commits
breach of any of the conditions thereof or any
other terms and conditions specified under this
Act or any rules or regulations made there under,
or where the Authority is satisfied that such
registration has been secured by the real estate
agent through misrepresentation or fraud, the
Authority may, without prejudice to any other
provisions under this Act, revoke the registration
or suspend the same for such period as it thinks
fit:
Provided that no such revocation or suspension
shall be made by the Authority unless an
opportunity of being heard has been given to the
real estate agent.
Functions of Real Estate Agents (Section 10)
Every real estate agent which is not registered
with the Authority shall not facilitate the sale or
purchase of any plot, apartment or building, as
the case may be, in a real estate project or part
of it, being sold by the promoter in any planning
area. So, firstly they require to register
themselves with the authority under section 9 of
the Act.
Every real estate agent maintains and preserves
such books of account, records and documents
as may prescribed. Every real estate agent not
to involve himself in any unfair trade practices,
namely:-
                                                    ? falsely
                                                    represents
                                                    that the
                                                    services are
(i) the practice of making any statement, whether of a particular
orally or in writing or by visible representation   standard or
which-                                              grade;
* represents that the promoter or himself has
approval or affiliation which such promoter or
himself does not have;
* makes a false or misleading representation
concerning the services.
(ii) permitting the publication of any
advertisement whether in any newspaper or
otherwise of services that are not intended to be
offered.
Every real estate agent shall facilitate the
possession of all the information and documents,
as the allottee, is entitled to, at the time of
booking of any plot, apartment or building, as the
case may be and discharge such other functions
as may be prescribed.
FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF PROMOTER
The most important duty of the promoter which
has been mandated by the Act is to provide
complete details of the project so that a layman
who does not even know the legal requirements
is able to check the legal sanctity of the project.
The promoter has also been debarred from
advertising and selling his project until he has
procured the requisite approvals from the
authorities and got his project registered with
RERA.
Functions and Duties of Promoter (Section 11)
The promoter shall, upon receiving his Login Id
and password, as the case may be, create his
web page on the website of the Authority and
enter all details of the proposed project for public
viewing, including-
(a) details of the registration granted by the
Authority;
(b) quarterly up-to-date the list of number and
types of apartments or plots, as the case may
be, booked;

(c) quarterly up-to-date the list of number of
garages booked;
(d) quarterly up-to-date the list of approvals
taken and the approvals which are pending
subsequent to commencement certificate;
(e) quarterly up-to-date status of the project; and
(f) such other information and documents as may
be specified by the regulations made by the
Authority.
The advertisement or prospectus issued or
published by the promoter shall mention
prominently the website address of the Authority,
wherein all details of the registered project have
been entered and include the registration
number obtained from the Authority and such
other matters incidental thereto.
The promoter at the time of the booking and
issue of allotment letter shall be responsible to
make available to the allottee, the following
information, namely:-
A. sanctioned plans, layout plans, along with
specifications, approved by the competent
authority, by display at the site or such other
place as may be specified by the regulations
made by the Authority;
B. the stage wise time schedule of completion of
the project, including the provisions for civic
infrastructure like water, sanitation and
electricity.
The promoter shall-
(a) be responsible for all obligations,
responsibilities and functions under the
provisions of the Act or the rules and regulations
made thereunder or to the allottees as per the
agreement for sale, or to the association of
allottees, as the case may be, till the conveyance
of all the apartments, plots or buildings, as the
case may be, to the allottees, or the common
areas to the association of allottees or the
competent authority, as the case may be:
Provided that the responsibility of the promoter,
with respect to the structural defect or any other
defect for such period as is referred to in sub-
section (3) of section 14, shall continue even
after the conveyance deed of all the apartments,
plots or buildings, as the case may be, to the
allottees are executed.
(b) be responsible to obtain the completion certifi
or the occupancy certifi or both, as applicable,
from the relevant competent authority as per
local laws or other laws for the time being in
force and to make it available to the allottees
individually or to the association of allottees, as
the case may be;
(c) be responsible to obtain the lease certificate,
where the real estate project is developed on a
leasehold
land, specifying the period of lease, and
certifying that all dues and charges in regard to
the leasehold land has been paid, and to make
the lease certificate available to the association
of allottees;
(d) be responsible for providing and maintaining
the essential services, on reasonable charges,
till the taking over of the maintenance of the
project by the association of the allottees;
(e) enable the formation of an association or
society or co-operative society, as the case may
be, of the allottees, or a federation of the same,
under the laws applicable:
Provided that in the absence of local laws, the
association of allottees, by whatever name
called, shall be formed within a period of three
months of the majority of allottees having
booked their plot or apartment or building, as the
case may be, in the project;
(f) execute a registered conveyance deed of the
apartment, plot or building, as the case may be,
in favour
of the allottee along with the undivided
proportionate title in the common areas to the
association of allottees or competent authority,
as the case may be, as provided under section
17 of this Act;
(g) pay all outgoings until he transfers the
physical possession of the real estate project to
the allottee or the associations of allottees, as
the case may be, which he has collected from
the allottees, for the payment of outgoings
(including land cost, ground rent, municipal or
other local taxes, charges for water or electricity,
maintenance charges, including mortgage loan
and interest on mortgages or other
encumbrances and such other liabilities payable
to competent authorities, banks and financial
institutions, which are related to the project):
Provided that where any promoter fails to pay all
or any of the outgoings collected by him from the
allottees or any liability, mortgage loan and
interest thereon before transferring the real
estate project to such allottees, or the
association of the allottees, as the case may be,
the promoter shall continue to be liable, even
after the transfer of the property, to pay such
outgoings and penal charges, if any, to the
authority or person to whom they are payable
and be liable for the cost of any legal
proceedings which may be taken therefore by
such authority or person;
(h) after he executes an agreement for sale for
any apartment, plot or building, as the case may
be, not mortgage or create a charge on such
apartment, plot or building, as the case may be,
and if any such mortgage or charge is made or
created then notwithstanding anything contained
in any other law for the time being in force, it
shall not affect the right and interest of the
allottee who has taken or agreed to take such
apartment, plot or building, as the case may be.
The promoter may cancel the allotment only in
terms of the agreement for sale. However, the
allottee may approach the Authority for relief, if
he is aggrieved by such cancellation and such
cancellation is not in accordance with the terms
of the agreement for sale, unilateral and without
any sufficient cause.
The promoter shall prepare and maintain all
such other details as may be specified, from time
to time, by regulations made by the Authority.
Obligations of Promoter regarding veracity of the
Advertisement or Prospectus (Section 12)
Where any person makes an advance or a
deposit on the basis of the information contained
in the notice advertisement or prospectus, or on
the basis of any model apartment, plot or
building, as the case may be, and sustains any
loss or damage by reason of any incorrect, false
statement included therein, he shall be
compensated by the promoter in the manner as
provided under the Act.
If the person affected by such incorrect, false
statement contained in the notice, advertisement
or prospectus, or the model apartment, plot or
building, as the case may be, intends to
withdraw from the proposed project, he shall be
returned his entire investment along with interest
at such rate as may be prescribed and the
compensation in the manner provided under the
Act.
No Deposit or Advance to be taken by Promoter
without First Entering into Agreement for Sale
According to Section 13, a promoter shall not
accept a sum more than ten per cent of the cost
of the apartment, plot, or building as the case
may be, as an advance payment or an
application fee, from a person without first
entering into a written agreement for sale with
such person and register the said agreement for
sale, under any law for the time being in force.
The agreement for sale shall be in such form as
may be prescribed and shall specify the
particulars of development of the project
including the construction of building and
apartments, along with specifications and
internal development works and external
development works, the dates and the manner
by which payments towards the cost of the
apartment, plot or building, as the case may be,
are to be made by the allottees and the date on
which the possession of the apartment, plot or
building is to be handed over, the rates of
interest payable by the promoter to the allottee
and the allottee to the promoter in case of
default, and such other particulars, as may be
prescribed.
Adherence to Sanctioned Plans and Project
Specifications by the Promoter
According to Section 14, the proposed project
shall be developed and completed by the
promoter in accordance with the sanctioned
plans, layout plans and specifications as
approved by the competent authorities.
Notwithstanding anything contained in any law,
contract or agreement, after the sanctioned
plans, layout plans and specifications and the
nature of the fixtures, fittings, amenities and
common areas, of the apartment, plot or
building, as the case may be, as approved by
the competent authority, are disclosed or
furnished to the person who agree to take one or
more of the said apartment, plot or building, as
the case may be, the promoter shall not make-
(a) any additions and alterations in the
sanctioned plans, layout plans and specifications
and the nature of fixtures, fittings and amenities
described therein in respect of the apartment,
plot or building, as the case may be, which are
agreed to be taken, without the previous consent
of that person:
The promoter may make such minor additions or
alterations as may be required by the allottee, or
such minor changes or alterations as may be
necessary due to architectural and structural
reasons duly recommended and verified by an
authorised Architect or Engineer after proper
declaration and intimation to the allottee.
minor additions or alterations excludes structural
change including an addition to the area or
change in height, or the removal of part of a
building, or any change to the structure, such as
the construction or removal or cutting into of any
wall or a part of a wall, partition, column, beam,
joist, floor including a mezzanine floor or other
support, or a change to or closing of any required
means of access ingress or egress or a change
to the fixtures or equipment, etc.
(b) any other alterations or additions in the
sanctioned plans, layout plans and specifications
of the buildings or the common areas within the
project without the previous written consent of at
least two- thirds of the allottees, other than the
promoter, who have agreed to take apartments
in such building.
The allottees, irrespective of the number of
apartments or plots, as the case may be, booked
by him or booked in the name of his family, or in
the case of other persons such as companies or
firms or any association of individuals, etc., by
whatever name called, booked in its name or
booked in the name of its associated entities or
related enterprises, shall be considered as one
allottee only.
It may be noted that -
Sanctioned plan means the site plan, building
plan, service plan, parking and circulation plan,
landscape plan, layout plan, zoning plan and
such other plan and includes structural designs,
if applicable, permissions such as environment
permission and such other permissions, which
are approved by the competent authority prior to
start of a real estate project. {Section 2(zq)}
Structural Defect
Section 14 provides that in case any structural
defect or any other defect in workmanship,
quality or provision of services or any other
obligations of the promoter as per the agreement
for sale relating to such development is brought
to the notice of the promoter within a period of
five years by the allottee from the date of
handing over possession, it shall be the duty of
the promoter to rectify such defects without
further charge, within thirty days, and in the
event of promoter's failure to rectify such defects
within such time, the aggrieved allottees shall be
entitled to receive appropriate compensation in
the manner as provided under the Act.
Obligations of Promoter in case of Transfer of a
Real Estate Project to a Third Party
Section 15 of the Act provides that the promoter
shall not transfer or assign his majority rights and
liabilities in respect of a real estate project to a
third party without obtaining prior written consent
from two-third allottees, except the promoter, and
without the prior written approval of the Authority.
However such transfer or assignment shall not
affect the allotment or sale of the apartments,
plots or buildings as the case may be, in the real
estate project made by the erstwhile promoter.
The allottee, irrespective of the number of
apartments or plots, as the case may be, booked
by him or booked in the name of his family, or in
the case of other persons such as companies or
firms or any association of individuals, by
whatever name called, booked in its name or
booked in the name of its associated entities or
related enterprises, shall be considered as one
allottee only.
On the transfer or assignment being permitted
by the allottees and the authority, the intending
promoter shall be required to independently
comply with all the pending obligations under the
provisions of the Act or the rules and regulations
made thereunder, and the pending obligations as
per the agreement for sale entered into by the
erstwhile promoter with the allottees.
Any transfer or assignment permitted shall not
result in extension of time to the intending
promoter to complete the real estate project and
he shall be required to comply with all the
pending obligations of the erstwhile promoter,
and in case of default, such intending promoter
shall be liable to the consequences of breach or
delay, as the case may be, as provided under
this Act or the rules and regulations made
thereunder.
Obligations of Promoter regarding Insurance of
Real Estate Project
Section 16 casts an obligation on the promoter
to obtain all such insurances as may be notified
by the appropriate Government, including but not
limited to insurance in respect of -
                                                           title of the land
                                                           and building as a         construction of
                                                           part of the real          the real estate
                                                     (i)   estate project; and(ii)   project.
The promoter shall be liable to pay the premium
and charges in respect of the insurance and
shall pay the same before transferring the
insurance to the association of the allottees.
The insurance shall stand transferred to the
benefit of the allottee or the association of
allottees, as the case may be, at the time of
promoter entering into an agreement for sale
with the allottee. On formation of the association
of the allottees, all documents relating to the
insurance shall be handed over to the
association of the allottees.
Transfer of Title (Section 17)
The promoter shall execute a registered
conveyance deed in favour of the allottee along
with the undivided proportionate title in the
common areas to the association of the allottees
or the competent authority, as the case may be,
and hand over the physical possession of the
plot, apartment of building, as the case may be,
to the allottees and the common areas to the
association of the allottees or the competent
authority, as the case may be, in a real estate
project, and the other title documents pertaining
thereto within specified period as per sanctioned
plans as provided under the local laws.
Provided that, in the absence of any local law,
conveyance deed in favour of the allottee or the
association of the allottees or the competent
authority, as the case may be, under this section
shall be carried out by the promoter within three
months from date of issue of occupancy
certificate.
After obtaining the occupancy certificate and
handing over physical possession to the
allottees, it shall be the responsibility of the
promoter to handover the necessary documents
and plans, including common areas, to the
association of the allottees or the competent
authority, as the case may be, as per the local
laws.
Provided that, in the absence of any local law,
the promoter shall handover the necessary
documents and plans, including common areas,
the association of the allottees or the competent
authority, as the case may be, within thirty days
after obtaining the occupancy certificate.
Return of Amount and Compensation (Section
18)
Section 18(1) provides that f the promoter fails to
complete or is unable to give possession of an
apartment, plot or building,-
(a) in accordance with the terms of the
agreement for sale or, as the case may be, duly
completed by the date specified therein; or
(b) due to discontinuance of his business as a
developer on account of suspension or
revocation of the registration under this Act or for
any other reason,
he shall be liable on demand to the allottees, in
case the allottee wishes to withdraw from the
project, without prejudice to any other remedy
available, to return the amount received by him
in respect of that apartment, plot, building, as the
case may be, with interest at such rate as may
be prescribed in this behalf including
compensation in the manner as provided under
this Act.
Provided that where an allottee does not intend
to withdraw from the project, he shall be paid, by
the promoter, interest for every month of delay,
till the handing over of the possession, at such
rate as may be prescribed.
The promoter shall compensate the allottees in
case of any loss caused to him due to defective
title of the land, on which the project is being
developed or has been developed, in the manner
as provided under this Act, and the claim for
compensation under this subsection shall not be
barred by limitation provided under any law for
the time being in force.
If the promoter fails to discharge any other
obligations imposed on him under this Act or the
rules or regulations made thereunder or in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the
agreement for sale, he shall be liable to pay
such compensation to the allottees, in the
manner as provided under this Act.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India while
interpreting Section 18 of the Act, in the case of
Imperia Structures Ltd. Vs. Anil Patni and
Another [2020(10) SCC 783 ] held that in terms
of Section 18 of the RERA Act, if a promoter fails
to complete or is unable to give possession of an
apartment duly completed by the date specified
in the agreement, the promoter would be liable,
on demand, to return the amount received by
him in respect of that apartment if the allottee
wishes to withdraw from the Project. Such right
of an allottee is specifically made "without
prejudice to any other remedy available to him".
The right so given to the allottee is unqualified
and if availed, the money deposited by the
allottee has to be refunded with interest at such
rate as may be prescribed. The proviso to
Section 18(1) contemplates a situation where the
allottee does not intend to withdraw from the
Project. In that case he is entitled to and must be
paid interest for every month of delay till the
handing over of the possession. It is up to the
allottee to proceed either under Section 18(1) or
under proviso to Section 18(1). The case of
Himanshu Giri came under the latter category.
The RERA Act thus definitely provides a remedy
to an allottee who wishes to withdraw from the
Project or claim return on his investment."
RIgHTS AND DUTIES OF ALLOTTEES
Rights and Duties of Allottees
Though the Act is pro-consumer, yet it has
struck a balance by specifying the duties of the
Allottees. Allottes who do not pay their
instalments, maintenance dues in time will also
be subjected to the rigours of this Act.
Section 19 provides for the various rights and
duties of the allottees.
1. The allottee shall be entitled to obtain the
information relating to sanctioned plans, layout
plans along with the specifications, approved by
the competent authority and such other
information as provided
in the Act or the rules and regulations made
thereunder or the agreement for sale signed with
the promoter.
2. The allottee shall be entitled to know stage-
wise time schedule of completion of the project,
including the provisions for water, sanitation,
electricity and other amenities and services as
agreed to between the promoter and the allottee
in accordance with the terms and conditions of
the agreement for sale.
3. The allottee shall be entitled to claim the
possession of apartment, plot or building, as the
case may be, and the association of allottees
shall be entitled to claim the possession of the
common areas, as per the declaration given by
the promoter.
4. The allottee shall be entitled to claim the
refund of amount paid along with interest at such
rate as may be prescribed and compensation in
the manner as provided under the Act, from the
promoter, if the promoter fails to comply or is
unable to give possession of the apartment, plot
or building, as the case may be, in accordance
with the terms of agreement for sale or due to
discontinuance of his business as a developer
on account of suspension or revocation of his
registration under the provisions of the Act or the
rules or regulations made thereunder.
5. The allottee shall be entitled to have the
necessary documents and plans, including that
of common areas, after handing over the
physical possession of the apartment or plot or
building as the case may be, by the promoter.
6. Every allottee, who has entered into an
agreement for sale to take an apartment, plot or
building as the case may be, shall be
responsible to make necessary payments in the
manner and within the time as specified in the
said agreement for sale and shall pay at the
proper time and place, the share of the
registration charges, municipal taxes, water and
electricity charges, maintenance charges,
ground rent, and other charges, if any.
7. The allottee shall be liable to pay interest, at
such rate as may be prescribed, for any delay in
payment towards any amount or charges to be
paid under sub-section (6).
8. The obligations of the allottee under sub-
section (6) and the liability towards interest under
sub-section
(7) may be reduced when mutually agreed to
between the promoter and such allottee.
9. Every allottee of the apartment, plot or building
as the case may be, shall participate towards the
formation of an association or society or
cooperative society of the allottees, or a
federation of the same.
10. Every allottee shall take physical possession
of the apartment, plot or building as the case
may be, within a period of two months of the
occupancy certificate issued for the said
apartment, plot or building, as the case may be.
11. Every allottee shall participate towards
registration of the conveyance deed of the
apartment, plot or building, as the case may be,
as provided under sub-section (1) of section 17
of this Act.
THE REAL ESTATE REgULATORY
AUTHORITY
As stated earlier, though this sector has seen
unprecedented growth since Independence, it
has remained unregulated till know. We have
witnessed that whenever a regulator is appointed
for a sector, like SEBI, IRDAI, TRAI etc, it widens
the sectors. Accordingly, this Act mandates that
RERA would be established by each of the State
and UT for administering the real estate sector in
the respective State/UT. A state can have more
than one RERA or two states can have the same
authority.
Establishment and Incorporation of Real Estate
Regulatory Authority (Section 20)
The appropriate Government shall establish an
Authority to be known as the Real Estate
Regulatory Authority to exercise the powers
conferred on it and to perform the functions
assigned to it under the Act.
The appropriate Government of two or more
States or Union territories may, if it deems fit,
establish one single Authority. Further, the
appropriate Government may, if it deems fit,
establish more than one Authority in a State or
Union territory, as the case may be.
Until the establishment of a Regulatory Authority
under this section, the appropriate Government
shall, by order, designate any Regulatory
Authority or any officer preferably the Secretary
of the department dealing with Housing, as the
Regulatory Authority for the purposes under the
Act. After the establishment of the Regulatory
Authority, all applications, complaints or cases
pending with the Regulatory Authority
designated, shall stand transferred to the
Regulatory Authority so established and shall be
heard from the stage such applications,
complaints or cases are transferred.
The Authority shall be a body corporate by the
name aforesaid having perpetual succession and
a common seal, with the power, subject to the
provisions of the Act, to acquire, hold and
dispose of property, both movable and
immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the
said name, sue or be sued.
Composition of Authority
The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and
not less than two whole time Members to be
appointed by the appropriate Government.
(Section 21)
Qualifications of Chairperson and Members of
Authority (Section 22)
The Chairperson and other Members of the
Authority shall be appointed by the appropriate
Government on the recommendations of a
Selection Committee consisting of the Chief
Justice of the High Court or his nominee, the
Secretary of the Department dealing with
Housing and the Law Secretary, in such manner
as may be prescribed, from amongst persons
having adequate knowledge of and professional
experience of at-least twenty years in case of
the Chairperson and fifteen years in the case of
the Members in urban development, housing,
real estate development, infrastructure,
economics, technical experts from relevant
fields, planning, law, commerce, accountancy,
industry, management, social service, public
affairs or administration.
It may be noted that a person who is, or has
been, in the service of the State Government
shall not be appointed as a Chairperson unless
such person has held the post of Additional
Secretary to the Central Government or any
equivalent post in the Central Government or
State Government. Further, a person who is, or
has been, in the service of the State
Government shall not be appointed as a member
unless such person has held the post of
Secretary to the State Government or any
equivalent post in the State Government or
Central Government.
Term of office of Chairperson and Members
(Section 23)
1. The Chairperson and Members shall hold
office for a term not exceeding five years from
the date on which they enter upon their office, or
until they attain the age of sixty-five years,
whichever is earlier and shall not be eligible for
re-appointment.
2. Before appointing any person as a
Chairperson or Member, the appropriate
Government shall satisfy itself that the person
does not have any such financial or other interest
as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as
such Member.
Filing of Complaints with the Authority or the
Adjudicating Officer (Section 31)
Any aggrieved person may file a complaint with
the Authority or the adjudicating officer, as the
case may be, for any violation or contravention
of the provisions of the Act or the rules and
regulations made thereunder against any
promoter allottee or real estate agent, as the
case may be.
It may be noted that "person" shall include the
association of allottees or any voluntary
consumer association registered under any law
for the time being in force.
Functions of Authority for Promotion of Real
Estate Sector (Section 32)
The Authority shall in order to facilitate the
growth and promotion of a healthy, transparent,
efficient and competitive real estate sector make
recommendations to the appropriate
Government of the competent authority, as the
case may be, on,-
* protection of interest of the allottees, promoter
and real estate agent;
* creation of a single window system for ensuring
time bound project approvals and clearances for
timely completion of the project;
* creation of a transparent and robust grievance
redressal mechanism against acts of omission
and commission of competent authorities and
their officials;
* measures to encourage investment in the real
estate sector including measures to increase
financial assistance to affordable housing
segment;
* measures to encourage construction of
environmentally sustainable and affordable
housing, promoting standardisation and use of
appropriate construction materials, fixtures,
fittings and construction techniques;
* measures to encourage grading of projects on
various parameters of development including
grading of promoters;
* measures to facilitate amicable conciliation of
disputes between the promoters and the
allottees through dispute settlement forums set
up by the consumer or promoter associations;
* measures to facilitate digitization of land
records and system towards conclusive property
titles with title guarantee;
* to render advice to the appropriate
Government in matters relating to the
development of real estate sector;
* any other issue that the Authority may think
necessary for the promotion of the real estate
sector.
Advocacy and Awareness Measures (Section
33)
The appropriate Government may, while
formulating a policy on real estate sector
(including review of laws related to real estate
sector) or any other matter, make a reference to
the Authority for its opinion on possible effect, of
such policy or law on real estate sector and on
the receipt of such a reference, the Authority
shall within a period of sixty days of making such
reference, give its opinion to the appropriate
Government which may thereafter take further
action as it deems fit.
The opinion given by the Authority shall not be
binding upon the appropriate Government in
formulating such policy or laws.
The Authority shall take suitable measures for
the promotion of advocacy, creating awareness
and imparting training about laws relating to real
estate sector and policies.
Functions of Authority (Section 34)
                                                                      ? to publish and
                                                                      maintain a website
                                                                      of records, for
                                                                      public viewing, of
                                                                      all real estate
                                                                      projects for which
                                                                      registration has
                                                                      been given, with
                                                                      such details as
                                                       ? to register may be
                                                       and regulate prescribed,
                                                       real estate    including
                                                       projects and information
                                                       real estate    provided in the
                                                       agents         application for
                                                       registered     which registration
The functions of the Authority shall include-          under the Act; has been granted;
* to maintain a database, on its website, for
public viewing, and enter the names and
photographs of promoters as defaulters including
the project details, registration for which has
been revoked or have been penalised under this
Act, with reasons therefor, for access to the
general public;
* to maintain a database, on its website, for
public viewing, and enter the names and
photographs of real estate agents who have
applied and registered under this Act, with such
details as may be prescribed, including those
whose registration has been rejected or revoked;
* to fix through regulations for each areas under
its jurisdiction the standard fees to be levied on
the allottees or the promoter or the real estate
agent, as the case may be;
* to ensure compliance of the obligations cast
upon the promoters, the allottees and the real
estate agents under the Act and the rules and
regulations made thereunder;
* to ensure compliance of its regulations or
orders or directions made in exercise of its
powers under the
Act;
* to perform such other functions as may be
entrusted to the Authority by the appropriate
Government as may be necessary to carry out
the provisions of the Act.
Powers of Authority to Call for Information,
Conduct Investigation (Section 35)
Where the Authority considers it expedient to do
so, on a complaint or suo motu, relating to the
Act or the rules of regulations made thereunder,
it may, by order in writing and recording reasons
therefor call upon any promoter or allottee or real
estate agent, as the case may be, at any time to
furnish in writing such information or explanation
relating to its affairs as the Authority may require
and appoint one or more persons to make an
inquiry in relation to the affairs of any promoter
or allottee or the real estate agent, as the case
may be.
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other
law for the time being in force, while exercising
the powers, the Authority shall have the same
powers as are vested in a civil court under the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit,
in respect of the following matters, namely:-
(i) the discovery and production of books of
account and other documents, at such place and
at such time as may be specified by the
Authority;
(ii) summoning and enforcing the attendance of
persons and examining them on oath;
                                                                     any other matter
(iii) issuing commissions for the examination of                     which may be
witnesses or documents;                             (iv)             prescribed.
Power to issue Interim Orders (Section 36)
Where during an inquiry, the Authority is satisfied
that an act in contravention of the Act, or the
rules and regulations made thereunder, has
been committed and continues to be committed
or that such act is about to be committed, the
Authority may, by order, restrain any promoter,
allottee or real estate agent from carrying on
such act until the conclusion of such inquiry of
until further orders, without giving notice to such
party, where the Authority deems it necessary.
Powers of Authority to Issue Directions (Section
37)
The Authority may, for the purpose of
discharging its functions under the provisions of
this Act or rules or regulations made thereunder,
issue such directions from time to time, to the
promoters or allottees or real estate agents, as
the case may be, as it may consider necessary
and such directions shall be binding on all
concerned.
Powers of Authority (Section 38)
1. The Authority shall have powers to impose
penalty or interest, in regard to any contravention
of obligations cast upon the promoters, the
allottees and the real estate agents, under this
Act or the rules and the regulations made
thereunder.

2. The Authority shall be guided by the principles
of natural justice and, subject to the other
provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder, the Authority shall have powers to
regulate its own procedure.
3. Where an issue is raised relating to
agreement, action, omission, practice or
procedure that-
(a) has an appreciable prevention, restriction or
distortion of competition in connection with the
development of a real estate project; or
(b) has effect of market power of monopoly
situation being abused for affecting interest of
allottees adversely, then the Authority, may suo
motu, make reference in respect of such issue to
the Competition Commission of India.
Rectification of Orders (Section 39)
The Authority may, at any time within a period of
two years from the date of the order made under
the Act, with a view to rectifying any mistake
apparent from the record, amend any order
passed by it, and shall make such amendment, if
the mistake is brought to its notice by the parties.
It may be noted that no such amendment shall
be made in respect of any order against which
an appeal has been preferred under the Act:
Recovery of Interest or Penalty or Compensation
and Enforcement of Order, etc. (Section 40)
Section 40(1) states that if a promoter or an
allottee or a real estate agent, as the case may
be, fails to pay any interest or penalty or
compensation imposed on him, by the
adjudicating officer or the Regulatory Authority or
the Appellate Authority, as the case may be,
under this Act or the rules and regulations made
thereunder, it shall be recoverable from such
promoter or allottee or real estate agent, in such
manner as may be prescribed as an arrears of
land revenue.
According to Section 40(2) if any adjudicating
officer or the Regulatory Authority or the
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, issues
any order or directs any person to do any act, or
refrain from doing any act, which it is empowered
to do under this Act or the rules or regulations
made thereunder, then in case of failure by any
person to comply with such order or direction,
the same shall be enforced, in such manner as
may be prescribed.
Whether the authority has the power to issue
recovery certificates for recovery of the principal
amount under Section 40(1) of the Act?
In the case of M/s. Newtech Promoters and
Developers Pvt. Ltd. Vs. State of UP & Ors. Etc,
Civil Appeal No(s). 6745-6749 of 2021 (Arising
out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 3711-3715 OF 2021)
judgement dated 11th November, 2021,
Supreme Court of India held that:
It is settled principle of law that if the plain
interpretation does not fulfil the mandate and
object of the Act, this Court has to interpret the
law in consonance with the spirit and purpose of
the statute. There is indeed a visible
inconsistency in the powers of the authority
regarding refund of the amount received by the
promoter and the provision of law in Section 18
and the text of the provision by which such
refund can be referred under Section 40(1).
While harmonising the construction of the
scheme of the Act with the right of recovery as
mandated in Section 40(1) of the Act keeping in
mind the intention of the legislature to provide for
a speedy recovery of the amount invested by the
allottee along with the interest incurred thereon
is self-explanatory. However, if Section 40(1) is
strictly construed and it is understood to mean
that only penalty and interest on the principal
amount are recoverable as arrears of land
revenue, it would defeat the basic purpose of the
Act.
Taking into consideration the scheme of the Act
what is to be returned to the allottee is his own
life savings with interest on computed/quantified
by the authority becomes recoverable and such
arrear becomes enforceable in law. There
appears some ambiguity in Section 40(1) of the
Act that in our view, by harmonising the
provision with the purpose of the Act, is given
effect to the provisions is allowed to operate
rather running either of them redundant, noticing
purport of the legislature and the above stated
principle into consideration, we make it clear that
the amount which has been determined and
refundable to the allottees/home buyers either
by the authority or the adjudicating officer in
terms of the order is recoverable within the ambit
of Section 40(1) of the Act.
Responsibilities of the 'Regulatory Authority'

CENTRAL ADvISORY COUNCIL
Establishment of Central Advisory Council
(Section 41)
1. The Central Government may, by notification,
establish with effect from such date as it may
specify in such notification, a Council to be
known as the Central Advisory Council.
2. The Minister to the Government of India in
charge of the Ministry of the Central Government
dealing with Housing shall be the ex officio
Chairperson of the Central Advisory Council.
3. The Central Advisory Council shall consist of
representatives of the Ministry of Finance,
Ministry of Industry and Commerce, Ministry of
Urban Development, Ministry of Consumer
Affairs, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Ministry of
Law and Justice, Niti Aayog, National Housing
Bank, Housing and Urban Development
Corporation, five representatives of State
Governments to be selected by rotation, five
representatives of the Real Estate Regulatory
Authorities to be selected by rotation, and any
other Central Government department as
notified.
4. The Central Advisory Council shall also
consist of not more than ten members to
represent the interests of real estate industry,
consumers, real estate agents, construction
labourers, non-governmental organisations and
academic and research bodies in the real estate
sector.
Functions of Central Advisory Council (Section
42)
The Central Advisory Council is required to
advise the Central Government on matters
relating to implementation of the Act, questions
of policy, protection of consumer interest, foster
growth and development of the real estate
sector, and other matters as may be assigned to
it by the Central Government.
The Central Government may specify the rules
to give effect to the recommendations of the
Central Advisory Council on above matters.
THE REAL ESTATE APPELLATE TRIbUNAL
Real Estate Appellate Tribunal (REAT) is to be
formed by appropriate government to ensure
faster resolution of disputes. Parties aggrieved
by the RERA order can appeal before REAT and
REAT has to adjudicate such cases within 60
days. Civil Courts have been prevented from
exercising jurisdiction on such matters. If any of
the parties is not satisfied with the REAT order,
they can file an appeal against the REAT order
to the High Court within 60 days.
Establishment of Real Estate Appellate Tribunal
(Section 43)
1. The appropriate Government shall, establish
an Appellate Tribunal to be known as the -
(name of the State/ Union territory) Real Estate
Appellate Tribunal.
2. The appropriate Government may, if it deems
necessary, establish one or more benches of the
Appellate Tribunal, for various jurisdictions, in
the State or Union territory, as the case may be.
3. Every bench of the Appellate Tribunal shall
consist of at least one Judicial Member and one
Administrative or Technical Member.
4. The appropriate Government of two or more
States or Union territories may, if it deems fit,
establish one single Appellate Tribunal.
5. Any person aggrieved by any direction or
decision or order made by the Authority or by an
adjudicating officer under the Act may prefer an
appeal before the Appellate Tribunal having
jurisdiction over the matter.
It may be noted that where a promoter files an
appeal with the Appellate Tribunal, it shall not be
entertained, without the promoter first having
deposited with the Appellate Tribunal atleast
thirty per cent. of the penalty, or such higher
percentage as may be determined by the
Appellate Tribunal, or the total amount to be paid
to the allottee including interest and
compensation imposed on him, if any, or with
both, as the case may be, before the said appeal
is heard.
Person shall include the association of allottees
or any voluntary consumer association
registered under any law for the time being in
force.
Whether the condition of predeposit under
proviso to Section 43(5) of the Act for
entertaining substantive right of appeal is
sustainable in law?
In the case of M/s. Newtech Promoters and
Developers Pvt. Ltd. Vs. State of UP & Ors. Etc,
Civil Appeal No(S). 6745 6749 of 2021 (Arising
out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 37113715 of 2021)
judgement dated 11th November, 2021,
Supreme Court of India held that:
To safeguard the interests of the parties, on
being decided by the regulatory
authority/adjudicating officer, it is always subject
to appeal before the Tribunal under Section
43(5) provided condition of pre- deposit being
complied with can be further challenged in
appeal before the High Court under Section 58
of the Act and, thus, the legislature has put
reasonable restriction and safeguards at all
stages. In our considered view, the obligation
cast upon the promoter of predeposit under
Section 43(5) of the Act, being a class in itself,
and the promoters who are in receipt of money
which is being claimed by the home
buyers/allottees for refund and determined in the
first place by the competent authority, if
legislature in its wisdom intended to ensure that
money once determined by the authority be
saved if appeal is to be preferred at the instance
of the promoter after due compliance of
predeposit as envisaged under Section 43(5) of
the Act, in no circumstance can be said to be
onerous as prayed for or in violation of Articles
14 or 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India.
Application for settlement of Disputes and
Appeals to Appellate Tribunal
Section 44 of the Act deals with application for
settlement of disputes and appeals to Appellate
Tribunal. It provides that-
The appropriate Government or the competent
authority or any person aggrieved by any
direction or order or decision of the Authority or
the adjudicating officer may prefer an appeal to
the Appellate Tribunal.
Every appeal made to the Appellate Tribunal
shall be preferred within a period of sixty days
from the date on which a copy of the direction or
order or decision made by the Authority or the
adjudicating officer is received by the
appropriate Government or the competent
authority or the aggrieved person and it shall be
in such form and accompanied by such fee, as
may be prescribed.
The Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal
after the expiry of sixty days if it is satisfied that
there was sufficient cause for not filling it within
that period.
On receipt of an appeal, the Appellate Tribunal
may after giving the parties an opportunity of
being heard, pass such orders, including interim
orders, as it thinks fit.
The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of
every order made by it to the parties and to the
Authority or the adjudicating officer, as the case
may be.
The appeal shall be dealt with by it as
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall
be made by it to dispose of the appeal within a
period of sixty days from the date of receipt of
appeal.
Provided that where any such appeal could not
be disposed of within the said period of sixty
days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its
reasons in writing for not disposing of the appeal
within that period.
The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of
examining the legality or propriety or correctness
of any order or decision of the Authority or the
adjudicating officer, on its own motion or
otherwise, call for the records relevant to
deposing of such appeal and make such orders
as it thinks fit.
Restrictions on Chairperson or Judicial Member
or Technical or Administrative Member on
Employment after Cessation of Office (Section
50)
The Chairperson or Judicial Member or
Technical or Administrative Member, ceasing to
hold office as such shall not:-
(a) Accept any employment in, or connected
with, the management or administration of, any
person or organisation which has been
associated with any work under this Act, from the
date on which he ceases to hold office.
Provided that nothing contained in this clause
shall apply to any employment under the
appropriate Government or a local authority or in
any statutory authority or any corporation
established by or under any Central, State of
provincial Act or a Government Company as
defined under clause (45) of section 2 of the
Companies Act, 2013, which is not a promoter
as per the provisions of the Act;
(b) Act, for or on behalf of any person or
organisation in connection with any specific
proceeding or transaction or negotiation or a
case to which the Authority is a party and with
respect to which the Chairperson or Judicial
Member or Technical or Administrative Member
had, before cessation of office, acted for or
provided advice to the Authority;
(c) Give advice to any person using information
which was obtained in his capacity as the
Chairperson or Judicial Member or Technical or
Administrative Member and being unavailable to
or not being able to be made available to the
public;
(d) Enter into a contract of service with, or accept
an appointment to a board of directors of, or
accept an offer of employment with, an entity
with which he had direct and significant official
dealings during his term of office as such.
The Chairperson or Judicial Member or
Technical or Administrative Member shall not
communicate or reveal to any person any matter
which has been brought under his consideration
or known to him while acting as such.
Powers of Tribunal (Section 53)
1. The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by
the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by the
principles of natural justice.
2. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the
Appellate Tribunal shall have power to regulate
its own procedure.
3. The Appellate Tribunal shall also not be
bound by the rules of evidence contained in the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
4. The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the
purpose of discharging its functions under this
Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in
respect of the following matters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of
any person and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of
documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examinations of
witnesses or documents;
(e) reviewing its decisions;
                                                    (g) any other
                                                    matter which
(f) dismissing an application for default or        may be
directing it ex parte; and                          prescribed.
5. All proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal
shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings
within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228
for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian
Penal Code, and the Appellate Tribunal shall be
deemed to be civil court for the purposes of
section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Right to Legal Representation (Section 56)
Section 56 deals with Right to legal
representation. It provides that
The applicant or appellant may either appear in
person or authorise one or more chartered
accountants or company secretaries or cost
accountants or legal practitioners or any of its
officers to present his or its case before the
Appellate Tribunal or the Regulatory Authority or
the adjudicating officer, as the case may be.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "chartered accountant" means a chartered
accountant as defined in clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 2 of the Chartered
Accountants Act, 1949 or any other law for the
time being in force and who has obtained a
certificate of practice under sub-section (1) of
section 6 of that Act;
(b) "company secretary" means a company
secretary as defined in clause (c) of sub-section
(1) of section 2
of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 or any
other law for the time being in force and who has
obtained a certificate of practice under sub-
section (1) of section 6 of that Act;
(c) "cost accountant" means a cost accountant
as defined in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants
Act, 1959 or any other law for the time being in
force and who has obtained a certificate of
practice under sub-section (1) of section 6 of that
Act;
(d) "legal practitioner" means an advocate, vakil
or an attorney of any High Court, and includes a
pleader in practice.
Orders passed by Appellate Tribunal to be
executable as a Decree (Section 57)
Every order made by the Appellate Tribunal
under this Act shall be executable by the
Appellate Tribunal as a decree of civil court, and
for this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal shall
have all the powers of a civil court.
The Appellate Tribunal may transmit any order
made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction
and such civil court shall execute the order as if
it were a decree made by the court.
Appeal to High Court (Section 58)
Any person aggrieved by any decision or order
of the Appellate Tribunal may, file an appeal to
the High Court, within a period of sixty days from
the date of communication of the decision or
order of the Appellate Tribunal to him on any one
or more of the grounds specified in section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
The High Court may entertain the appeal after
the expiry of the said period of sixty days, if it is
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in
time.
Explanation.- "High Court" means the High Court
of a State or Union territory where the real estate
project is situated. No appeal shall lie against
any decision or order made by the Appellate
Tribunal with the consent of the parties.
Real Estate Regulatory Authority and Appellate
Tribunal

ROLE OF COMPANY SECRETARIES

India is witnessing a phenomenal growth and
expansion in the corporate sector. The growing
demand for specialists in almost every sphere of
the corporate functions has led to emergence of
professionals who can perform specialized skills
with near perfection in their respective fields. A
company secretary is one such professional who
is responsible for efficient management of the
corporate sector. He ensures compliance of
various company legislations and advises
directors on statutory requirements of the
company. Apart from carrying out these
functions, he also looks after finance, accounts,
legal, secretarial, personnel and administrative
functions in private as well as public sectors.
The Companies Act, 2013 confers a special
status to Company Secretary as the key
managerial personnel and has bracketed him
along with Managing Director (MD) or Chief
Executive Officer (CEO) or Manager, Whole-
time director(s) or Chief Financial Officer (CFO).
Every listed company and every other public
company having a paid up share capital of ten
crore rupees or more has to appoint a whole time
Key Managerial Personnel. Every private
company which has a paid up share capital of
ten crore rupees or more shall have a whole -
time company secretary.
Almost every kind of organization whose affairs
are conducted by boards, councils or other
corporate structures, be it a company, trust,
association, federation, authority, commission or
the like find it useful to appoint a person who
holds the qualification of Company Secretaryship
in key administrative position. Practising
Company Secretaries have been authorized to
issue Certificate regarding compliance of
conditions of Corporate Governance. Practising
Company Secretaries have also been
recognized to appear before various Tribunals
such as NCLT, NCLAT, Securities Appellate
Tribunal, Competition Commission of India,
Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate
Tribunal, Consumer Forums, Tax Tribunals etc.
Reserve Bank of India has also recognized the
Practising Company Secretaries to undertake
Diligence Report for Banks.

The rapid change in Indian Legislative has
brought about a sea change in the role and
profile of a company secretary. They are now
being seen as corporate development planners.
Besides embarking upon traditional areas of
practice, Company Secretaries in Practice are
increasingly required to advise and guide on
legal aspects of business which intimately
concern areas such as registration under RERA,
production, drafting of various documents, sales,
marketing and administration for identifying
expansion opportunities, issuing due diligence or
compliance certificate, arranging foreign
collaborations, amalgamations, mergers,
acquisition, takeovers, setting up of subsidiaries
and joint ventures within and outside India etc.
The new opportunities offered by the growing
capital markets and financial services have
greatly contributed to the development of the
practice side of the profession.
Company Secretaries - One Stop Professional
Advisory Services for Real Estate Projects
Company Secretaries holding Certificate of
Practice by becoming an expert in the act can
indulge in providing advice in respect of:
* Financial Advisory Services;
* Various applicable provision particular on real
estate project;
                                                         Various obligation,
                                                         functions and                              Funding         Taxation
                                                         duties of promoter      Penal              Options for     aspects for     Legal &
* Registration and extension procedure of real           in a real estate        Provisions         Real Estate     Real Estate     Regulatory
estate project with competent authority;             ?   project;            ?   under the Act; ?   Project;    ?   Project;    ?   Compliances.
Company Secretaries - As a Legal
Representative
As per Section 56 of the Act, a Company
Secretary holding certificate of practice can
appear before Appellate Tribunal or a Regulatory
Authority or Adjudicating Officer on behalf of
applicant or appellant as the case may be.
Hence a Company Secretary holding certificate
of practice can -
* Represent a person (promoter) before any real
estate regulatory authority for registration of real
estate project,
* Represent a person before real estate
appellate tribunal.
* Represent a person before any other
competent authority for any other purpose under
Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act,
2016.
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION
Punishment prescribed for non-registration of a
project under the Act
As per section 59, where under the Act, it is
obligatory for the promoter to register a project
with the Authority, and the promoter fails to do
the same, he shall be liable to a penalty upto ten
percent of the estimated cost of the real estate
project.
However, in case the promoter consistently
defaults or does not comply with the directions
orders of the Authority as regards registration of
the project with the Authority, he shall be liable
to additional fine of ten percent of the estimated
cost of the real estate project or imprisonment
upto 3 years or both.
Penalty for contravention of section 4
If any promoter provides false information or
contravenes the provisions of section 4, he shall
be liable to a penalty, under section 60 of the
Act, which may extend up to five per cent of the
estimated cost of the real estate project, as
determined by the Authority.
Penalty for contravention of other provisions of
the Act (Section 61)
If any promoter contravenes any other provisions
of the Act, other than that provided under section
3 or section 4, or the rules or regulations made
thereunder, he shall be liable to a penalty which
may extend up to five per cent. of the estimated
cost of the real estate project as determined by
the Authority.
Penalty for non-registration and contravention
under sections 9 and 10 (Section 62)
If any real estate agent fails to comply with or
contravenes the provisions of section 9 or
section 10, he shall be liable to a penalty of ten
thousand rupees for every day during which
such default continues, which may cumulatively
extend up to five per cent of the cost of plot,
apartment or buildings, as the case may be, of
the real estate project, for which the sale or
purchase has been facilitated as determined by
the Authority.
Penalty for failure to comply with orders of
Authority by Promoter (Section 63)
If any promoter, who fails to comply with, or
contravenes any of the orders or directions of
the Authority, he shall be liable to a penalty for
every day during which such default continues,
which may cumulatively extend up to five per
cent., of the estimated cost of the real estate
project as determined by the Authority.
Penalty for failure to comply with orders of
Appellate Tribunal by promoter (Section 64)
If any promoter, who fails to comply with, or
contravenes any of the orders, decisions or
directions of the Appellate Tribunal, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend up to three years or with fine for
every day during which such default continues,
which may cumulatively extend up to ten per
cent. of the estimated cost of the real estate
project, or with both.
Penalty for failure to comply with orders of
Authority by real estate agent (Section 65)
If any real estate agent, who fails to comply with,
or contravenes any of the orders or directions of
the Authority, he shall be liable to a penalty for
every day during which such default continues,
which may cumulatively extend up to five per
cent., of the estimated cost of plot, apartment or
building, as the case may be, of the real estate
project, for which the sale or purchase has been
facilitated and as determined by the Authority.
Penalty for failure to comply with orders of
Appellate Tribunal by real estate agent (Section
66)
If any real estate agent, who fails to comply with,
or contravenes any of the orders, decisions or
directions of the Appellate Tribunal, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend up to one year or with fine for every
day during which such default continues, which
may cumulatively extend up to ten per cent. of
the estimated cost of plot, apartment or building,
as the case may be, of the real estate project, for
which the sale or purchase has been facilitated,
or with both.
Penalty for failure to comply with orders of
Authority by allottee (Section 67)
If any allottee, who fails to comply with, or
contravenes any of the orders, decisions or
directions of the Authority he shall be liable to a
penalty for the period during which such default
continues, which may cumulatively extend up to
five per cent. of the plot, apartment or building
cost, as the case may be, as determined by the
Authority.
Penalty for failure to comply with orders of
Appellate Tribunal by allottee(Section 68)
If any allottee, who fails to comply with, or
contravenes any of the orders or directions of
the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, he
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend up to one year or with fine for
every day during which such default continues,
which may cumulatively extend up to ten per
cent of the plot, apartment or building cost, as
the case may be, or with both.
Offences by companies (Section 69)
Where an Offence under the Act has been
committed by a company, every person who, at
the time, the offence was committed was in
charge of, or was responsible to the company for
the conduct of, the business of the company, as
well as the company, shall be deemed to be
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
However nothing contained in this sub-section,
shall render any such person liable to any
punishment under the Act if he proves that the
offence was committed without his knowledge or
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent
the commission of such offence.
Where an offence under the Act has been
committed by a company, and it is proved that
the offence has been committed with the consent
or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect
on the part of any director, manager, secretary or
other officer of the company, such director,
manager, secretary or other officer shall also be
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
Explanation.-
                                                              company'' means
                                                              any body
                                                              corporate and
                                                              includes a firm, or
                                                              other association
                                                              of individuals; and
                                                              (b) director'' in
                                                              relation to a firm,
                                                              means a partner
                                                        (a)   in the firm.
Compounding of offences (Section 70)
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, if any person is
punished with imprisonment under the Act, the
punishment may, either before or after the
institution of the prosecution, be compounded by
the court on such terms and conditions and on
payment of such sums as may be prescribed.
However the sum prescribed shall not, in any
case, exceed the maximum amount of the fine
which may be imposed for the offence so
compounded.
Power to adjudicate (Section 71)
For the purpose of adjudging compensation
under sections 12, 14, 18 and section 19
(Section 12 deals with obligations of promoter
regarding veracity of the advertisement or
prospectus, Section 14 deals with Adherence to
sanctioned plans and project specifications by
the promoter, Section 18 deals with Return of
amount and compensation, Section 19 deals
with Rights and duties of allottees), the Authority
shall appoint in consultation with the appropriate
Government one or more judicial officer as
deemed necessary, who is or has been a District
Judge to be an adjudicating officer for holding an
inquiry in the prescribed manner, after giving any
person concerned a reasonable opportunity of
being heard.
Any person whose complaint in respect of
matters covered under section(s) 12, 14, 18 and
section 19 is pending before the Consumer
Disputes Redressal Forum or the Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission or the National
Consumer Redressal Commission, established
under section 9 of the Consumer Protection Act,
1986, on or before the commencement of the
Act, he may, with the permission of such Forum
or Commission, as the case may be, withdraw
the complaint pending before it and file an
application before the adjudicating officer under
this Act.
The application for adjudging compensation shall
be dealt with by the adjudicating officer as
expeditiously as possible and dispose of the
same within a period of sixty days from the date
of receipt of the application. Where any such
application could not be disposed of within the
said period of sixty days, the adjudicating officer
shall record his reasons in writing for not
disposing of the application within that period.
While holding an inquiry the adjudicating officer
shall have power to summon and enforce the
attendance of any person acquainted with the
facts and circumstances of the case to give
evidence or to produce any document which in
the opinion of the adjudicating officer, may be
useful for or relevant to the subject matter of the
inquiry and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that
the person has failed to comply with the
provisions of any of the sections i.e., sections 12,
14, 18 and section 19, he may direct to pay such
compensation or interest, as the case any be, as
he thinks fit in accordance with the provisions of
any of those sections.
Whether the authority has jurisdiction to direct
return/refund of the amount to the allottee under
Sections 12, 14, 18 and 19 of the Act or the
jurisdiction exclusively lies with the adjudicating
officer under Section 71 of the Act?
In the case of M/s. Newtech Promoters and
Developers Pvt. Ltd. Vs. State of UP & Ors. Etc,
Civil Appeal No(S). 6745 6749 of 2021 (Arising
out of SLP (Civil) No(s). 37113715 OF 2021)
judgement dated 11th November, 2021 Supreme
Court of India held that:
The legislature in its wisdom has made a specific
provision delineating power to be exercised by
the regulatory authority/adjudicating officer.
Refund of the amount" and "compensation" are
two distinct components which the allottee or the
person aggrieved is entitled to claim if the
promoter has not been able to hand over
possession with a nature of enquiry and
mechanism provided under the Act. So far as the
claim with respect to refund of amount on
demand under Sections 18(1) and 19(4) of the
Act is concerned, it vests within the jurisdiction of
the regulatory authority. Section 71 carves out
the jurisdiction of the adjudicating officer to
adjudge compensation under Sections 12, 14, 18
and 19 after holding enquiry under Section 71(3)
of the Act keeping in view the broad contours
referred to under Section 72 of the Act.
From the scheme of the Act of which a detailed
reference has been made and taking note of
power of adjudication delineated with the
regulatory authority and adjudicating officer,
what finally culls out is that although the Act
indicates the distinct expressions like 'refund',
'interest', 'penalty' and 'compensation', a conjoint
reading of Sections 18 and 19 clearly manifests
that when it comes to refund of the amount, and
interest on the refund amount, or directing
payment of interest for delayed delivery of
possession, or penalty and interest thereon, it is
the regulatory authority which has the power to
examine and determine the outcome of a
complaint. At the same time, when it comes to a
question of seeking the relief of adjudging
compensation and interest thereon under
Sections 12, 14, 18 and 19, the adjudicating
officer exclusively has the power to determine,
keeping in view the collective reading of Section
71 read with Section 72 of the Act. If the
adjudication under Sections 12, 14, 18 and 19
other than compensation as envisaged, if
extended to the adjudicating officer as prayed
that, in our view, may intend to expand the ambit
and scope of the powers and functions of the
adjudicating officer under Section 71 and that
would be against the mandate of the Act 2016."
Factors to be taken into account by the
adjudicating officer (Section 72)
While adjudging the quantum of compensation or
interest, as the case may be, under section 71,
the adjudicating officer shall have due regard to
the following factors, namely:- (a) the amount of
disproportionate gain or unfair advantage,
wherever quantifiable, made as a result of the
default; (b) the amount of loss caused as a result
of the default; (c) the repetitive nature of the
default; (d) such other factors which the
adjudicating officer considers necessary to the
case in furtherance of justice.
MISCELLANEOUS
bar of Jurisdiction (Section 79)
No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain
any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter
which the Authority or the Adjudicating officer or
the Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or under
the Act to determine and no injunction shall be
granted by any court or other authority in respect
of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance
of any power conferred by or under the Act.
Cognizance of Offences (Section 80)
No court shall take cognizance of any offence
punishable under this Act or the rules or
regulations made thereunder save on a
complaint in writing made by the Authority or by
any officer of the Authority duly authorised by it
for this purpose.
No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first
class shall try any offence punishable under this
Act.
Delegation (Section 81)
The Authority may, by general or special order in
writing, delegate to any member, officer of the
Authority or any other person subject to such
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the
order, such of its powers and functions under this
Act (except the power to make regulations under
section 85), as it may deem necessary.
Whether Section 81 of the Act authorizes the
authority to delegate its powers to a single
member of the authority to hear complaints
instituted under Section 31 of the Act?
In the case of M/s. Newtech Promoters and
Developers Pvt. Ltd. Vs. State of UP & Ors. Etc.,
Civil Appeal No(S). 6745 6749 of 2021 (Arising
out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 3711-3715 of 2021)
judgement dated 11th November, 2021 Supreme
Court of India held that:
Section 81 of the Act 2016 empowers the
authority, by general or special order in writing,
to delegate its powers to any member of the
authority, subject to conditions as may be
specified in the order, such of the powers and
functions under the Act. What has been excluded
is the power to make regulations under Section
85, rest of the powers exercised by the authority
can always be delegated to any of its members
obviously for expeditious disposal of the
applications/complaints including complaints
filed under Section 31 of the Act and exercise of
such power by a general and special order to its
members is always permissible under the
provisions of the Act.
It is a well-established principle of interpretation
of law that the court should read the section in
literal sense and cannot rewrite it to suit its
convenience; nor does any canon of
construction permit the court to read the section
in such a manner as to render it to some extent
otiose. Section 81 of the Act positively
empowers the authority to delegate such of its
powers and functions to any member by a
general or a special order with an exception to
make regulations under Section 85 of the Act. As
a consequence, except the power to make
regulations under Section 85 of the Act, other
powers and functions of the authority, by a
general or special order, if delegated to a single
member of the authority is indeed within the fold
of Section 81 of the Act.
That scheme of the Act, 2016 provides an inbuilt
mechanism and any order passed on a
complaint by the authority under Section 31 is
appealable before the tribunal under Section
43(5) and further in appeal to the High Court
under Section 58 of the Act on one or more
ground specified under Section 100 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, if any manifest error is
left by the authority either in computation or in
the amount refundable to the allottee/home
buyer, is open to be considered at the appellate
stage on the complaint made by the person
aggrieved.
In view of the remedial mechanism provided
under the scheme of the Act 2016, in our
considered view, the power of delegation under
Section 81 of the Act by the authority to one of
its member for deciding applications/complaints
under Section 31 of the Act is not only well
defined but expressly permissible and that
cannot be said to be dehors the mandate of law.
Application of other laws not barred (Section 88)
The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to,
and not in derogation of, the provisions of any
other law for the time being in force.
Act to have overriding effect (Section 89)
The provisions of this Act shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
contained in any other law for the time being in
force.
Protection of action taken in good faith (Section
90)
No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings
shall lie against the appropriate Government or
the Authority or any officer of the appropriate
Government or any member, officer or other
employees of the Authority for anything which is
in good faith done or intended to be done under
this Act or the rules or regulations made
thereunder.
LESSON ROUND-UP
l On and from the coming into force of the RERA,
all real estate projects (as defined) would first
have to be registered with the real estate
regulatory authority, which, before registering
such projects, would look into all relevant details,
including delay in completion of other projects by
the developer.
l Importantly, the promoter is now to make a
declaration supported by an affidavit, that he
undertakes to complete the project within a
certain time period, and that 70% of the amounts
realised for the project from allottees, from time
to time, shall be deposited in a separate account,
which would be spent only to defray the cost of
construction and land cost for that particular
project.
l Registration is granted by the authority only
when it is satisfied that the promoter is a bona
fide promoter who is likely to perform his part of
the bargain satisfactorily.

l Registration of the project is only for a certain
period and can only be extended due to force
majeure events for a maximum period of one
year by the authority, on being satisfied that
such events have, in fact, taken place.
l Registration once granted, may be revoked if it
is found that the promoter defaults in complying
with the various statutory requirements or
indulges in unfair practices or irregularities.
Importantly, upon revocation of registration, the
authority is to facilitate the remaining
development work, which can then be carried out
either by the competent authority as defined by
the RERA or by the association of allottees or
otherwise.
l The promoter at the time of booking and issue
of allotment letters has to make available to the
allottees information, inter alia, as to the stage-
wise time schedule of completion of the project.
l Deposits or advances beyond 10% of the
estimated cost as advance payment cannot be
taken without first entering into an agreement for
sale. Importantly, the agreement for sale will
now no longer be a one-sided contract of
adhesion, but in such form as may be
prescribed, which balances the rights and
obligations of both the promoter and the
allottees.
l Under section 18, if the promoter fails to
complete or is unable to give possession of an
apartment, plot or building in accordance with
the terms of the agreement for sale, he must
return the amount received by him in respect of
such apartment etc. with such interest as may be
prescribed and must, in addition, the agreement
for sale. In addition, all allottees are to be
responsible for making necessary payments in
instalments within the time specified in the
agreement for sale and shall be liable to pay
interest at such rate as may be prescribed for
any delay in such payment.
l Under section 31, any aggrieved person may
file a complaint with the authority or the
adjudicating officers set up by such authority
against any promoter, allottee or real estate
agent, as the case may be, for violation or
contravention of the RERA, and rules and
regulations made thereunder.
l Also, if after adjudication a promoter, allottee or
real estate agent fails to pay interest, penalty or
compensation imposed on him by the authorities
under the RERA, the same shall be recoverable
as arrears of land revenue.
l Appeals may be filed to the real estate
appellate tribunal against decisions or orders of
the authority or the adjudicating officer. From
orders of the appellate tribunal, appeals may
thereafter be filed to the High Court. Stiff
penalties are to be awarded for breach and/or
contravention of the provisions of the RERA.
l Importantly, under section 72, the adjudicating
officer must first determine that the complainant
has established default on the part of the
respondent, after which consequential orders
may then follow. ? Under section 88, the
provisions of RERA are in addition to and not in
derogation of the provisions of any other law for
time being in force and under section 89, RERA
is to have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent contained in any other law for the
time being in force.
TEST YOURSELF
(These are meant for re-capitulation only.
Answers to these questions are not to be
submitted for evaluation)
1. Define following:
(i) Carpet Area
(ii) Occupancy certificate
2. When is registration of real estate project not
required under the Act?
3. What happens if the Authority fails to grant the
registration or reject the application within a
period of thirty days on receipt of the application
for registration of the project under the Act?
4. Explain Advocacy and awareness measures
under the Act.
5. Whether authority under the Real Estate
Regulation and Development (RERA) Act, 2016
will have jurisdiction to entertain a complaint by
an aggrieved person against a bank which is a
secured creditor, if the bank takes legal recourse
to Section 13(4) of the Securitisation and
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Securities Interest Act, 2002
(SARFAESI Act)? Which Act will prevail
SARFAESI or RERA?
LIST OF FURTHER READINgS
l Bare Act - Real Estate (Regulation and
Development) Act 2016 and rules made
thereunder.
l Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act,
2016 (RERA) - ICSI ? Real Estate (Regulation
and Development) Act 2016 - Taxmann
OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDINg
WEbSITES / vIDEO LINKS)
? https://mohua.gov.in/




INTRODUCTION
As the term intellectual property relates to the
creations of human mind and human intellect,
this property is called Intellectual property.
Creators can be given the right to prevent others
from using their inventions, designs or other
creations and to use that right to negotiate
payment in return for others using them. These
are Intellectual Property Rights. The creation of
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) is increasingly
being recognised in today's global economy and
society. Intellectual Property Rights are
considered to be the backbone of any economy
and their creation and protection is essential for
sustained growth of a nation. The intellectual
property rights are now not only being used as a
tool to protect the creativity and generate
revenue but also to build strategic alliances for
the socio-economic and technological growth.
Intellectual Property is the Property, which has
been created by exercise of Intellectual Faculty.
It is the result of persons Intellectual Activities.
Thus Intellectual Property refers to creation of
mind such as inventions, designs for industrial
articles, literary, artistic work, symbols which are
ultimately used in commerce. Intellectual
Property rights allow the creators or owners to
have the benefits from their works when these
are exploited commercially. These rights are
statutory rights governed in accordance with the
provisions of corresponding legislations.
Intellectual Property rights reward creativity &
human endeavor which fuel the progress of
humankind.
The areas of intellectual property that it covers
are: copyright and related rights (i.e. the rights of
performers, producers of sound recordings and
broadcasting organizations); trademarks
including service marks; geographical indications
including appellations of origin; industrial
designs; patents including the protection of new
varieties of plants; the layout-designs of
integrated circuits; and undisclosed information
including trade secrets and test data.
Intellectual property is a vital component of
economic growth and a tool for corporate
competitiveness in today's highly competitive
global market. Intellectual property rights serve
as a catalyst for the development of innovations
and inventions. Ideas, innovations, and creative
expressions on the basis of which there is a
public desire to grant the status of property are
referred to as intellectual property rights (IPR). In
order for the inventors or developers of that
property to profit commercially from their creative
efforts or reputation, IPR grant them specific
exclusive rights. There are various forms of
intellectual property protection, including
trademark, copyright, and patent.
Technology management is to promote the
effective and efficient use of created technology.
Intellectual property rights (IPR) are ideas,
inventions, and creative expressions on which
the public is ready to bestow the status of
property. It is increasingly important to manage
technology, including efficient commercialization
plans that take use of IPR benefits, in a dynamic
global context with shifting industry and
competitor landscapes.
Any original work of the human intellect,
including works of art, literature, technology, and
science, is considered to be a work of intellectual
property (IP). The legal privileges granted to the
inventor or creator to safeguard his invention or
creativity for a predetermined amount of time are
known as intellectual property rights (IPR). For a
specific amount of time, these legal rights grant
the inventor or creator's assignee the sole right
to fully exploit their idea or production. The
importance of IP in the contemporary economy
has long been established. Furthermore, it has
been unequivocally proven that the intellectual
work involved in the innovation must be given
the attention it deserves if the innovation is to
serve the greater good.
Since it gives the inventor or creator of an IP an
exclusive right to exploit his invention or product
for a specific length of time, IPR is a powerful
weapon for protecting investments in time,
money, and effort. By enabling healthy
competition, industrial progress, and economic
expansion, IPR thereby contributes to the
economic development of a nation.
Any society's progress is directly influenced by
IPR and the framework of its policy. Lack of
understanding of IPR led to the demise of
inventions, a high danger of infringement,
financial loss, and the end of a nation's
intellectual era. Therefore, there is a critical
necessity for the transmission of IPR knowledge
in order to support home-grown discoveries and
technological advancements. Only by teaching
the many stakeholders, including policymakers,
farmers, academia, industry, researchers, and
consumers about the significance of IPR and
technology management can the process of IP
awareness be accelerated in an agrarian nation
like India.
REgULATORY FRAMEWORK

NATURE OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
* Intangible Rights over Tangible Property: IP's
intangibility is the primary characteristic that sets
it apart from other types of property. Although
there are many significant differences between
the various types of IP, one characteristic they all
share is the establishment of property protection
over intangible objects like ideas, inventions,
signs, and information as opposed to close
relationships and other intangible assets, which
are tangible objects. When works are exploited
for commercial purposes, it enables the creators
or owners to profit from their creations.
* Right to sue: IP is a resource that can be
owned and managed, to use the language of the
law. The majority of intellectual property is
challenged through legal rights of action that can
only be carried out by people who have legal
standing. Since intellectual property (IP) is a
property right, it can be inherited, purchased,
gifted, sold, licenced, entrusted, or pledged.
Subject to certain restrictions, the owner of an
IPR owns a sort of property that can be used
however they like. They also have the legal right
to sue anyone who uses their innovation without
their permission and to be compensated with
actual property.
* Rights and Duties: IP results in both obligations
and property rights. The owner of the IP is
entitled to carry out specific tasks in connection
with his creations. He has the sole authority to
create, copy, sell,
and otherwise exploit the work. Additionally,
there is a negative right that bars others from
using their statutory rights.
* Coexistence of different rights: In relation to a
specific function, various IPR kinds may coexist.
For instance, an image of an innovation might be
copyrighted and the invention itself might be
patented. A design may be included in a
trademark and may also be protected under the
Design Act. The numerous rights that can
coexist in IP share many similarities and
distinctions. For instance, there are similarities
between a patent and an industrial design, a
trademark and a geographical indicator, and so
forth. Some of the rights related to intellectual
property are positive rights, while the others are
negative rights.
* Exhaustion of rights: The doctrine of
exhaustion generally applies to intellectual
property rights. Exhaustion fundamentally means
that after the first sale made by the right holder
or by the authority designated for its exhaustion,
that person's right expires and he is no longer
permitted to halt the movement of the goods
moving forward. As a result, once an IP rights
holder has sold a physical good that bears IPRs,
it cannot stop subsequent sales of the good. The
first consent marks the end of the right. This
theory is founded on the idea of free movement
of products, which is legitimate by the owner's
permission or right. It is prohibited to use the
exclusive selling privilege in connection to the
same items twice.
* Dynamism: IPR is undergoing continual
improvement. The realm of IP is expanding as
quickly as technology in all spheres of human
activity. New things are being added to the IPR
scope and the scope of its protection is being
enlarged in accordance with the demands of
scientific and technical advancement.
Biopatents, Software Copyrights, and Plant
Diversity Protection are just a few examples of
terms that highlight recent advancements in the
IPR area. The value of intellectual property and
its portability has long been recognised, and it is
represented in all spheres of government,
including legislative, administrative, and judicial
levels.
NEED OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
Every invention involves labour, time, and
resources. The length of each project varies
substantially. It could be anything from a few
seconds to a few years. A certain amount of
actual money is also necessary for any creative
endeavour, along with education or knowledge
of course. Any creative professional making all of
these investments is making a significant one.
Therefore, it is important to acknowledge and
honour a creator's intellectual works. The word
"intellectual property" did not become common
usage until the 19th century, despite the fact that
many of the legal rules governing intellectual
property rights have developed over centuries. It
wasn't until the latter half of the 20th century that
it spread throughout much of the world.
In 1967, the World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO) was founded as a UN
body. Since then, the phrase has gained
significant traction in the US. A comprehensive
international system for defining, safeguarding,
and upholding intellectual property rights exists.
It consists of multilateral treaty systems as well
as international organisations like the European
Union, World Trade Organization, World
Intellectual Property Organization, World
Customs Organization, and United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law
(UNCITRAL).
SCOPE OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
The range of IP rights is wide, and there are two
methods for classifying IP as either copyright or
industrial property. Patents or inventions,
trademarks, trade names, biodiversity, plant
breeding rights, and other commercial interests
are all examples of industrial properties. In order
to profit from the invention, a patent gives its
holder the sole right to exploit the Intellectual
Property.
A novel creation, procedure, tool, or product is
considered to be an invention. Copyright protects
the expression of ideas that are distinct from
patents but does not grant you the sole right to
an idea. In addition to technological and
scientific works, copyright also applies to the arts
and literature. Copyright rules apply to
everything, including music and audiovisual
works. 60 years after the creator's passing,
copyright protection continues to be in effect. In
other words, a writer's book has copyright
protection both during his lifetime and for 60
years following his passing. In contrast to patent
laws, copyright laws do not mandate an
administrative procedure.
The general Agreement on Trade in Services
(gATS)
The General Agreement on Trade in Services
(GATS) is the first ever collection of legally
binding, multinational regulations governing
global trade in services. One of the most
important outcomes of the Uruguay Round,
whose conclusions came into effect in January
1995, was the founding of the GATS. The
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT), the GATS's counterpart in merchandise
trade, served as a model for it, sharing many of
the same goals: establishing a trustworthy and
reliable system of international trade regulations;
guaranteeing the non-discrimination of all
participants; boosting economic activity through
guaranteed policy bindings; and advancing trade
and development through progressive
liberalisation. The GATS functions on three
levels, similar to the accords on goods: the
primary text, which contains basic principles and
obligations; annexes, which deal with rules for
particular sectors; and individual nations' explicit
commitments to allow access to their markets. In
contrast to goods, the GATS provides a fourth
special element list that identifies the instances
where the most-favored-nation principle of non-
discrimination is not currently being followed by
a country.
Although services today make up more than two
thirds of global production and employment,
when measured on a basis of balance of
payments, they only account for no more than
25% of total commerce. However, this share-
while appearing modest-should not be
undervalued. Indeed, one of the GATS-defined
modes of service supply-the supply through
commercial presence in another country-is not
included in balance-of-payments figures (mode
3). Additionally, even while trade in services is
growing, they are also essential components in
the manufacturing of products. As a result, when
measured in terms of value added, services
make up around 50% of global commerce.
The two key pillars that support the GATS'
contribution to global services trade are (a)
increasing the openness and predictability of
pertinent rules and regulations and (b) fostering
progressive liberalisation through subsequent
rounds of talks. The latter idea is equivalent,
within the meaning of the Agreement, to
enhancing market access and extending national
treatment to foreign services and service
providers across a broader variety of sectors.
But it doesn't involve deregulation. Instead, the
Agreement emphasises clearly both the need for
developing nations in particular to exercise this
right, as well as governments' right to regulate
and enact new regulations to fulfil national policy
objectives.
The Agreement's overall framework and specific
sections were influenced by the concerns of
developing countries. In particular, the Preamble
to the Agreement and the provisions of Article IV
are motivated by the goal of supporting the
growing participation of developing nations in
services trade. This Article requires members to
negotiate specific commitments regarding the
improvement of developing countries' access to
distribution channels and information networks,
the strengthening of developing countries'
domestic service capacity, and the liberalisation
of market access in sectors of export interest to
these countries, among other things.
Although one of the fundamental principles of
the GATS is the idea of progressive
liberalisation, Article XIX stipulates that
liberalisation must take place with due
consideration for national policy objectives and
members' levels of development, both generally
and in specific sectors. Thus, developing nations
are given the option to gradually expand market
access while opening fewer sectors and fewer
types of transactions in accordance with their
stage of development. Other sections make sure
that developing nations have more freedom to
pursue economic integration policies, uphold
balance of payments limits, and control who can
access and utilise their telecommunications
transport networks and services. Additionally, the
WTO Secretariat is permitted to provide
technical assistance to developing nations.
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)
The United Nations organisation devoted to
using intellectual property as a tool to foster
innovation and creativity is known as the World
Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).
Following the WIPO Convention's entrance into
effect in 1967, WIPO was founded in 1970 with a
mission from its Member States to advance the
protection of intellectual property all over the
globe through intergovernmental cooperation
and cooperation with other international
organisations. Its goal is to foster innovation and
creativity through the creation of a fair and
efficient international intellectual property system
for the benefit of all nations' economic, social,
and cultural development.
In 1974, the Organization was designated as a
specialised agency of the UN. The WIPO's main
office is in Geneva. It is committed to creating a
fair and open worldwide intellectual property (IP)
system that encourages innovation, rewards
creativity, and advances economic growth while
protecting the general welfare. By signing a
cooperative agreement with the World Trade
Organization in 1996, WIPO enlarged its
mandate and further illustrated the significance
of intellectual property rights in the administration
of globalised trade.
In order to establish and unify laws and
procedures for the protection of intellectual
property rights, WIPO serves as a platform for its
Member States. Additionally, WIPO provides
global patent filing services as well as global
registration services for trademarks, industrial
designs, and appellations of origin. Systems for
protecting intellectual property have existed in
the majority of developed countries for decades.
However, many emerging and developing
nations are still constructing their legal
frameworks and systems for copyright, patents,
and trademarks. Through treaty negotiation,
registration, enforcement, legal and technical
assistance, and training in various forms, WIPO
plays a critical role in assisting these new
systems in evolving in light of the increasing
globalisation of trade and the rapid changes in
technological innovation.
The World Intellectual Property Organization
works to advance the growth and application of
the global intellectual property system by:
* Services - run systems which make it easier to
obtain protection internationally for patents,
trademarks, designs and appellations of origin;
and to resolve IP disputes.
* Law - develop the international legal IP
framework in line with society's evolving needs.
* Infrastructure - build collaborative networks and
technical platforms to share knowledge and
simplify IP transactions, including free databases
and tools for exchanging information.
* Development - build capacity in the use of IP to
support economic development. Legal
Frameworks under WIPO
* Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT): The Paris
Convention's Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT)
enables public access to a plethora of technical
data pertaining to such inventions while also
assisting applicants in securing patent protection
for their ideas on a global scale. Applicants are
able to concurrently apply for protection of an
innovation in a large number of nations by
submitting a single worldwide patent application
under the PCT.
* Madrid Agreement: The Madrid Agreement,
signed in 1891, and the Protocol pertaining to
that Agreement, signed in 1989, set forth the
rules for the Madrid System for the International
Registration of Marks. By acquiring an
international registration that is valid in each of
the specified Contracting Parties, the method
enables the protection of a mark across a wide
range of nations.
* Vienna Agreement: For marks that are
composed of or incorporate figurative features,
the Vienna Agreement creates an International
Classification of the Figurative Elements of
Marks known as the Vienna Classification.
                                                     ? Locarno
                                                     Agreement:
                                                     The Locarno
                                                     Agreement
                                                     creates the
                                                     Locarno
                                                     Classification,
                                                     an
                                                     international
* Nice Agreement: Regarding the International classification
Classification of Goods and Services for the         system for
Registration of Marks, the Nice Agreement came industrial
into force.                                          designs.
* WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT): A particular
agreement under the Berne Convention known
as the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) deals with
the protection of works and the rights of their
authors in the digital sphere. The Treaty also
addresses two items that must be covered by
copyright protection: (i) computer programmes,
regardless of how they are expressed; and (ii)
collections of data or other materials
("databases").
* WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty
(WPPT): In especially in the digital context, the
WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty
(WPPT) deals with the rights of two categories of
beneficiaries: (i) performers (actors, singers,
musicians, etc.); and (ii) manufacturers of
phonograms (persons or legal entities that take
the initiative and have the responsibility for the
fixation of sounds).
                                                     ? Standing
                                                     Committee on
                                                     Copyright and
                                                     Related
                                                     Rights
                                                     (SCCR):
                                                     During the
                                                     biennium of
                                                     1998-1999,
                                                     the Standing
                                                     Committee on
                                                     Copyright and
                                                     Related
                                                     Rights
* WIPO Intergovernmental Committee :                 (SCCR) was
According to its mandate, the WIPO                   established to
Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual          look into
Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional          issues of
Knowledge, and Folklore is engaging in text-         substantive
based negotiations to find a text or texts for an law or
international legal instrument that will effectively harmonisation
protect traditional knowledge (TK), traditional      in the area of
cultural expressions (TCEs), and genetic             copyright and
resources (GRs).                                     related rights.
* Hague System/Agreement: Through the
submission of a single international application,
the Hague System for the International
Registration of Industrial Designs offers a useful
commercial option for registering up to 100
designs in 74 contracting parties spanning 91
countries.
* Lisbon System/Agreement: By using a single
registration process and a single set of costs, the
Lisbon System for the International Registration
of Appellations of Origin and Geographical
Indications provides a way to secure protection
for an appellation of origin or a geographical
indication in the contracting parties.
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPS)

Beyond simply transporting items across
borders, trade has developed to include the
value it brings to societies. Today's international
trade involves a significant amount of value
exchanged through innovation, creativity, and
branding. Development and trade policy
increasingly heavily weighs how to increase this
value and make it easier for knowledge-rich
commodities and services to move across
borders.
The TRIPS Agreement is essential for facilitating
intellectual property trade, settling intellectual
property trade disputes, and giving WTO
members the freedom to pursue their own
national goals. The Agreement formally
acknowledges the importance of the connections
between intellectual property and trade. That
was accomplished by the Uruguay Round. The
TRIPS Agreement is an attempt to put these
rights under common international law and to
close the gaps in how they are safeguarded and
upheld globally. It provides minimal requirements
for enforcement and protection of intellectual
property owned by citizens of other WTO
members by each government.
WTO countries have a great deal of flexibility
under the TRIPS Agreement to customise their
methods to IP protection and enforcement to
meet their needs and realise public policy
objectives. The Agreement gives members
plenty of leeway to strike a balance between the
long-term advantages of encouraging innovation
and the potential short-term costs of restricting
access to works of creative genius. Through a
variety of procedures permitted by TRIPS
provisions, such as exclusions or exceptions to
intellectual property rights, Members can lower
short-term costs. Additionally, the WTO's dispute
resolution mechanism is accessible in cases of
trade disputes involving the application of the
TRIPS Agreement.
The TRIPS Agreement addresses five main
topics:
* How general rules and fundamental ideas of
the global trading system apply to international
intellectual property?
                                                        What mechanisms
                                                        should members
                                                        offer to defend
* What are the minimum protection criteria for          those rights in
intellectual property rights that members should        their home
offer?                                              ?   countries?
* Specific interim framework for resolving
intellectual property disputes between WTO
members in order to implement TRIPS
requirements.
* Special transitional arrangements for the
implementation of TRIPS provisions.
THE CONCEPT OF INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY
The term "intellectual property" refers to works
produced by the human mind and intellect. In
other words, intellectual property refers to
information that may be used to create tangible
goods simultaneously in an infinite number of
copies at various locations throughout the globe.
The information reflected in those copies, not the
copies themselves, is what grants the property
right. Similar to property rights in movable and
immovable property, intellectual property is also
characterised by certain rights as well as
limitations such as right to use and licence and
also limited duration in the case of copy right and
patents.
Industrial Property
The expression 'Industrial Property' is
sometimes misunderstood as relating to movable
or immovable property used for industrial
production. However, industrial property is a kind
of intellectual property and relates to creation of
human mind, e.g., inventions and industrial
designs. Simply stated, inventions are new
solutions to technological problems, and
industrial designs are aesthetic creations
determining the appearance of industrial
products. In addition, industrial property includes
trademarks, service marks, commercial names
and designations, including indications of source
and appellations of origin, and the protection
against unfair competition.
The term 'Industrial Property' may not appear
entirely logical in the sense that the inventions
are only concerned with the industry. In other
words, the inventions are exploited in industrial
plants while the trademarks, service marks, trade
names and service names are concerned with
both the commerce as well as industry.
Notwithstanding the lack of logic, this term has
acquired a meaning which clearly covers
inventions as well as other marks. The Paris
Convention also recognised industrial property to
cover patent, trademark, service mark, trade
names, utility models, industrial designs,
indication of source and appellations of origin
and the repression of unfair competition.
Hence, industrial property right is a collective
name for rights referring to the commercial or
industrial activities of a person. These activities
may include the activities of industrial or
commercial interests. They may be called
inventions, creations, new products, processes
of manufacture, new designs or model and a
distinctive mark for goods etc.
A person's commercial or industrial activities are
covered by a group of rights known as industrial
property rights. The actions of commercial or
industrial interests may be among these
activities. They can be referred to as inventions,
creations, new products, manufacturing
methods, new designs or models, and
distinguishing marks for commodities, among
other terms.
Patent
A patent is a monopoly award that gives the
inventor control over the output and, up to a
certain point in the demand curve, the price of
the patented goods. The patent system's primary
economic and commercial justification is that it
encourages investment in industrial innovation.
The upkeep and expansion of a country's stock
of valuable, transferable, and industrial assets
are both facilitated by innovative technologies.
An innovation, such as a product or a technique
that gives a novel approach to a problem or a
new technical solution, is given an exclusive right
known as a patent. An invention is the concept
for creating a novel and practical product,
process, or substance. Without the permission of
the patent holder, the innovation cannot be
made, utilised, disseminated, or sold for a profit.
For the duration that the invention is shielded by
a patent, the patent holder has the authority to
decide who may or may not use the invention.
The owner of the patent may provide another
party a licence to exploit the innovation under
mutually agreeable terms. Additionally, he has
the option to transfer ownership of the patent to
the buyer of the right to use the innovation. From
the day the patent application was submitted, the
patent is valid for 20 years. After a patent
expires, the invention is no longer protected and
becomes part of the public domain, meaning that
the owner no longer has the sole right to use the
invention.
Trade Mark
A trade mark tries to safeguard both the interests
of the trader and the customer by differentiating
the items of one manufacturer or trader from
comparable goods of others. A trademark can be
any combination of words, characters, numbers,
symbols, or devices showing images of people,
animals, or both. A trademark acts as an
effective form of advertising for the goods and
their quality since it denotes the relationship
between the merchant and the items during the
course of commerce. The goal of trademark law
is to give businesses the ability to acquire an
exclusive right to use, share, or assign a mark by
registering their mark. Similar to this, service
marks set one company's services apart from
those of other companies.
Like inventions and industrial designs, it is
patentable. Various combinations of words,
letters, numbers, symbols, drawings, images,
and even sounds can be used as a trademark.
These are typically registered for seven years,
but by reapplying, they can be renewed
indefinitely. It guarantees the owner of the mark
the sole right to use it to distinguish products or
services, or to grant another person permission
to use it in exchange for payment. Because of
the nature and quality of the goods or service,
which are denoted by its distinctive trademark, it
aids consumers in recognising and purchasing it.
Copyright
The idea of Copyright protection only began to
emerge with the invention of printing, which
made it for literary works to be duplicated by
mechanical processes instead of being copied
by hand. This led to the grant of privileges, by
authorities and kings, entitling beneficiaries
exclusive rights of reproduction and distribution,
for limited period, with remedies in the form of
fines, seizure, confiscation of infringing copies
and possibly damages.
However, the criticism of the system of privileges
led to the adoption of the Statute of Anne in
1709, the first copyright Statute. In the 18th
century there was dispute over the relationship
between copyright subsisting in common law
and copyright under the Statute of Anne. This
was finally settled by House of Lords in 1774
which ruled that at common law the author had
the sole right of printing and publishing his book,
but that once a book was published the rights in
it were exclusively regulated by the Statute. This
common law right in unpublished works lasted
until the Copyright Act, 1911, which abolished
the Statute of Anne.
Copyright is a well recognised form of property
right which had its roots in the common law
system and subsequently came to be governed
by the national laws in each country. Copyright
as the name suggests arose as an exclusive
right of the author to copy the literature produced
by him and stop others from doing so.
There are well-known instances of legal
intervension to punish a person for copying
literary or aesthetic out put of another even
before the concept of copyright took shape. The
concept of idea was originally concerned with the
field of literature and arts. In view of
technological advancements in recent times,
copyright protection has been expanded
considerably. Today, copyright law has extended
protection not only to literary, dramatic, musical
and artistic works but also sound recordings,
films, broadcasts, cable programmes and
typographical arrangements of publications.
Computer programs have also been brought
within the purview of copyright law.
Thus, the copyright deals with the rights of
intellectual creators in their creation. The
copyright law deals with the particular forms of
creativity, concerned primarily with mass
communication. It is also concerned with virtually
all forms and methods of public communication,
not only printed publications but also with such
matters as sound, and television broadcasting,
films for public exhibition etc. and even
computerised systems for the storage and
retrieval of information. The copyright law,
however, protects only the form of expression of
ideas themselves. The creativity protected by
copyright law is creativity in the choice and
arrangement of words, musical notes, colours,
shapes and so on. In India, the law relating to
copyright is governed by the Copyright Act, 1957
which has been amended in 1983, 1984, 1985,
1991, 1992, 1994, 1999 and 2012. The
amendment introduced in 1984 included
computer program within the definition of literary
work and a new definition of computer program
was inserted by the 1994 amendment. The
philosophical justification for including computer
programs under literary work has been that
computer programs are also products of
intellectual skill like any other literary work.
In 1999, the Copyright Act, 1957 has been
amended to give effect to the provisions of
Article 14 of the TRIPs agreement providing
term of protection to performers rights at least
until the end of a period of fifty years computed
from the end of the calendar year in which the
performance took place. The Amendment Act
also inserted new Section 40A empowering the
Central Government to extend the provisions of
the Copyright Act to broadcasts and
performances made in other countries subject to
the condition however that such countries extend
similar protection to broadcasts and
performances made in India. Another new
Section 42A empowers the Central Government
to restrict rights of foreign broadcasting
organisations and performers.
Industrial Designs
Industrial designs belong to the aesthetic field,
but are at the same time intended to serve as
pattern for the manufacture of products of
industry or handicraft. An industrial design is the
ornamental or aesthetic aspect of a useful article,
which must appeal to the sense of sight and may
consist of the shape and/or pattern and/or colour
of article. An industrial design to be protectable,
must be new and origin. Industrial designs are
protected against unauthorised copying or
limitation, for a period which usually lasts for five,
ten or fifteen years.
Textile designs were the first to receive legal
protection. As early as 1787 the first Act for
design protection was enacted in Great Britain
for the Encouragement of the Arts of design and
printing Linens, cotton, calicoes and Muslims, by
vesting properties thereof in the Designers,
Printers and Proprietors for a limited time. This
was an experimental measure extending
protection for a limited duration. Shortly
thereafter its life was extended and soon
afterwards it was made perpetual. In 1839 the
protection under the Act was enlarged to cover
"Designs for Printing other woven Fabrics".
In the same year another Act was passed for
design protection for articles of manufacture
generally. An Act to secure to Proprietors of
Designs for Articles of Manufacture the
Copyright of such Designs for a limited time. The
legislative process for design protection took
rapid strides thereafter. A consolidating and
updating measure enacted in 1842. An Act to
consolidate and amend the laws relating to the
Copyright of Designs for ornamenting Articles of
manufacture-repealed all the earlier statutes
referred to above.
It is significant to observe that when the designs
law was codified in 1842 and took its modern day
shape, copyright protection had not yet been
extended to drawings, paintings and
photographs. This came only twenty years later
with the enactment of the Fine Arts Copyright
Act, 1862. Codification of copyright law was
nowhere in sight and came only seventy years
later with the enactment of the Imperial
Copyright Act, 1911. Until 1883 the statutes
relating to patents, designs and trademarks
remained separate. They were combined in a
single enactment by the Patents, Designs, and
Trade Marks Act, 1883, which repealed all the
then existing statutes in the three areas. Soon
trademarks law parted company and was
separately enacted as the Trade Marks Act,
1905, leaving patents and designs to remain
together. The Patents and Designs Act, 1907,
consolidated the enactments relating to patents
and designs.
The first designs legislation enacted in India was
the Patterns and Designs Protection Act, 1872. It
was enacted as a supplement to the Statute-Act
15 of 1859-passed by the Governor-General of
India in Council which for the first time made
provision for granting to inventors of "new
manufacture the exclusive privilege of making,
selling and using the invention in India or
authorising others to do so for a specified term.
The Act of 1872 was passed to extend similar
privileges to the inventors of new patterns and
designs in British India, though for a very shorter
duration of years. It included in the term new
manufacture any new and original pattern or
design, or the application of such pattern or
design to any substance or article of
manufacture". The Act, however, left undefined
the expression new pattern or design.
The Inventions and Designs Act, 1898, which
consolidated and amended the law relating to
the protection of inventions and designs
contained provisions relating to designs in a
separate part. The (British) Patents and Designs
Act, 1907, became the basis of the Indian
Patents and Designs Act, 1911. The patents
provisions of the Indian Patents and Designs
Act, 1911, were repealed by the Patents Act,
1970, a post-Independence updating and
consolidation of the patents law. The design
provisions of the Indian Patents and Designs
Act, 1911, continue, with some consequential
amendments, with the title as the Designs Act,
1911. The new Designs Act, 2000 has been
passed by the Parliament.
geographical Indication (gI)
Geographical Indicator is that part of industrial
property that designates a nation or a location
within it as the nation or place of origin of that
product. Such a name typically carries a
guarantee of quality and individuality, which is
mostly due to the fact that it originated in the
specified geographical place, region, or nation.
Signs that identify a product's exact geographic
origin are known as geographic indicators. A GI
identifies a product's origin, which could be a
village or town, a region, or a nation, and
identifies the product's unique traits. Since it is
an exclusive privilege granted to a certain
community, all of the community's members
profit from its registration. All producers or
traders whose goods originate from that location
and have defining traits may use it.
Geographical Indications are covered by Articles
22 to 24 of the WTO Agreement on Trade-
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS), which was a component of the
Agreements that concluded the Uruguay Round
of GATT negotiations. The Geographical
Indications of Goods (Registration and
Protection) Act, 1999 was passed by India as a
WTO member. It was enacted in December
1999, and it became effective on September 15,
2003. With this Act, geographical indicators for
commodities in India are to be registered and
given additional protection.

Bordeaux wine, Darjeeling tea, Chanderi sarees,
Kullu shawls, Tuscany olive oil, Kanchipuram silk
sarees, Alphanso Mango, Nagpur orange, and
Kolhapuri (Chappal) are well-known examples of
GIs.
Trade Secret
A trade secret is a method, practise, procedure,
design, instrument, pattern, or collection of
information that is not widely known or easily
discoverable and through which a company
might gain a competitive edge over rivals or
clients. An enterprise may gain a competitive
edge from secret business information. Sales
techniques, distribution strategies, consumer
profiles, marketing plans, client and supplier lists,
production procedures, and advertising
strategies are all examples of trade secrets. A
trade secret can be preserved indefinitely, but
there must be a significant amount of secrecy,
making it difficult to obtain the information unless
inappropriate means are used.
NATIONAL INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
RIgHTS POLICY
The Indian government has provided the
exclusive right of intellectual property to
safeguard the originality of inventors' works. The
simplest form of intellectual property is an
intangible work of human imagination. This
intellectual property contains rights centred on
copyright, patents, trademarks, trade names,
industrial designs, and merchandise. Maintaining
intellectual property rights is crucial for the
quality, safety, and effectiveness of all
pharmaceutical products and services. For the
certification and identification of products in a
large market, it serves as a standard authority
and certification body. The privileges granted to
individuals over the works of their imaginations
are known as intellectual property rights.
Typically, they grant the creator a limited time,
exclusive permission to utilise his or her works.
The term "intellectual property" refers to human
inventions in the fields of art, literature, science,
and industry. This application is crucial for
protecting the inventor's invention and upholding
the inventor's work's high standards of quality.
As a result of these changes, the government
decided to create a roadmap for IPRs in the
nation. The National Intellectual Property Rights
Policy was put into place to encourage
innovation, enhance the business climate, and
make it easier to commercially utilise intellectual
property. The Policy is in accordance with India's
proclamation that this decade is the "Decade of
Innovation".
On May 12th, 2016, the Union Cabinet approved
the IPR Policy. It acknowledges India's well-
established, TRIPScompliant legal structure to
protect IPRs and strives to balance her
development objectives by making use of the
flexibilities offered by the global regime. The
Policy places a special emphasis on spreading
knowledge about IPRs and emphasising their
value as a marketable financial asset and a tool
for the economy.
IPR Policy focus on:
* Improving access to healthcare, food security,
and environmental protection, among other
areas of critical social, economic, and
technological importance.
* fostering creativity and innovation and thereby
promote entrepreneurship and enhance socio-
economic and cultural development.
The Policy outlines seven goals that are further
defined with actions that must be taken by the
designated nodal Ministry or Department. The
goals are briefly discussed below:-
* IPR Awareness: Outreach and Promotion - To
create public awareness about the economic,
social and cultural benefits of IPRs among all
sections of society.
* generation of IPRs - To stimulate the
generation of IPR.
* Legal and Legislative Framework - To have
strong and effective IPR laws, which balance the
interests of rights owners with larger public
interest.
                                                                  Commercialization
* Administration and Management - To                              of IPR - Get value
modernize and strengthen service oriented IPR                     for IPRs through
administration.                                 ?                 commercialization.
* Enforcement and Adjudication - To strengthen
the enforcement and adjudicatory mechanisms
for combating IPR infringements.
* Human Capital Development - To strengthen
and expand human resources, institutions and
capacities for teaching, training, research and
skill building in IPRs.

LESSON ROUND-UP
* A patent is a monopoly award that gives the
inventor control over the output and, up to a
certain point in the demand curve, the price of
the patented goods. The patent system's primary
economic and commercial justification is that it
encourages investment in industrial innovation.
* A trade mark tries to safeguard both the
interests of the trader and the customer by
differentiating the items of one manufacturer or
trader from comparable goods of others. A
trademark can be any combination of words,
characters, numbers, symbols, or devices
showing images of people, animals, or both.
                                                   ?
                                                   Geographical
                                                   Indicator is
                                                   that part of
                                                   industrial
                                                   property that
                                                   designates a
                                                   nation or a
                                                   location within
                                                   it as the
                                                   nation or
                                                   place of origin
                                                   of that
                                                   product. Such
                                                   a name
                                                   typically
                                                   carries a
                                                   guarantee of
                                                   quality and
                                                   individuality,
                                                   which is
* A trade secret is a method, practise, procedure,mostly due to
design, instrument, pattern, or collection of      the fact that it
information that is not widely known or easily     originated in
discoverable and through which a company           the specified
might gain a competitive edge over rivals or       geographical
clients. An enterprise may gain a competitive      place, region,
edge from secret business information.             or nation.
* The National Intellectual Property Rights Policy
encourage innovation, enhance the business
climate, and make it easier to commercially
utilise intellectual property. The Policy is in
accordance with India's proclamation that this
decade is the "Decade of Innovation".
TEST YOURSELF
(These are meant for re-capitulation only.
Answers to these questions are not to be
submitted for evaluation)
1. Discuss the need of Intellectual Property
Protection Laws in India.
2. What is Industrial Property?
3. A patent is a monopoly award that gives the
inventor control over the output. Critically
Examine.
4. What is Trade Secret?
5. Discuss briefly National Intellectual Property
Rights Policy.
LIST OF FURTHER READINgS
? Intellectual Property Laws and Practice -
Elizabeth Verkey ? Law Relating to Intellectual
Property - Dr. BL Wadhera
OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDINg
WEbSITES / vIDEO LINKS)
l https://ipindia.gov.in/
l https://www.wipo.int/portal/en/index.html
REgULATORY FRAMEWORK
> Patents Act 1970
> Patents Rules 2003
The term 'Patent' acquired a statutory meaning
in India under the Patents Act, 1970. The Act
and the Rules framed under it, i.e. the Patent
Rules, 2003 regulate the subjects like the grant,
the operative period, the revocation, and
infringement etc. of the Patents.
INTRODUCTION
A Patent is a statutory right for an invention
granted for a limited period of time to the
patentee by the Government, in exchange of full
disclosure of his invention for excluding others,
from making, using, selling, importing the
patented product or process for producing that
product for those purposes without his consent.
Patent is a monopoly grant and it enables the
inventor to control the output and within the limits
set by demand, the price of the patented
products. Underlying economic and commercial
justification for the patent system is that it acts
as a stimulus to investment in the Industrial
innovation. Innovative technology leads to the
maintenance of and increase in nations stock of
valuable, tradable and industrial assets.
The law relating to patents contained in the
Patents Act, 1970 .The Patents Act was enacted
by the Government of India in the year 1970 in
pursuance of its powers under Entry 49 of the
List I of Schedule VII of the Constitution of India.
List I contains the list of the items in the Union
List and Entry 49 reads, "Patents, inventions and
designs; copyright; trade-marks and
merchandise marks." The Act was notified on
19th September 1970. It has been amended in
the year 1995, 1999, 2002 and 2005. With
increase in the technological progress of India,
the fundamental reasoning of the Act is that
patents are given to promote innovations &
developments and to ensure that these creations
got recognition commercially without delay; and
patents are conceded to empower patentee to
commercially utilize the monopoly for the
importation of the patented product into the
nation. The similar rationality is applicable in
compulsory licensing, certification cum
registration of process patents for sustenance, or
medication, other products like pesticides came
through synthetic procedures which, aside from
compound substances ordinarily incorporate
things, for example, combinations, optical glass,
semi-transmitters, alloys, etc. It might,
nonetheless, be noticed that items fundamental
for our economy, for example, agribusiness and
cultivation items, nuclear vitality creations and all
organic products are not patentable. So, the
Patents legislation was relied upon to provide a
sensible adjust amongst satisfactory & efficient
security of patents from one perspective and the
innovation improvement, open intrigue and
particular needs of the nation on another.
PATENTS
Section 2(1) (m) of the Patents Act, 1970,
defines the term patent as to mean a patent for
any invention granted under Patents Act.
An invention is considered as new (novel), if it is
not anticipated by prior publication in patent and
non-patent literature, i.e., an invention is novel if
it has not been disclosed in the prior art, where
the prior art means everything that has been
published, presented or otherwise disclosed to
the public before the date of filing/ priority date of
complete specification. An invention is
considered as novel, if it has not been
anticipated by prior use or prior public knowledge
in India.
In the case of Bishwanath Prasad Radhey
Shyam v. Hindustan Metal Industries, (1979) 2
SCC 511, it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court of India that the object of Patent law is to
encourage scientific research, new technology
and industrial progress. A limited-time grant of
the only right to own, use, or sell a patented
method or product encourages the development
of new commercially useful inventions. The
disclosure of the invention to the Patent Office,
which becomes public domain after a
predetermined duration of the monopoly, is the
cost of the monopoly grant.
Advantages of Patents
> Patentee have the complete rights to restrict
outsider from making, operating, providing
accessibility to be bought, providing or putting in
the product generated by him, without his
consent. He has absolute prerogative to utilize
his invention and his rights that are very much
ensured under the Act.
> The patentee has a privilege to file the suit for
encroachment of his patent and can ask for
remedies like, Injunction, compensation and a
settlement of profit against the individual who
encroached his patent.

> Patentee can commercially exploit or pitch his
creation to any skilled individual and concede
permit to him to abuse his item and in this way
the patentee can likewise wins benefit along
these lines.
> The holder of the exclusive permit can also
avail the rights given to the patentee and can
bring a suit if there should arise an occurrence of
any encroachment of Patent.
> A patentee gets the privilege to make changes
in or alterations of an invention depicted or
uncovered in the total determination of the
primary innovation and get the particular right of
a patent by the substantial change or patent as a
matter of addition/certain adjustment.
It may be noted that according to Section 2(1) (p)
of the Patents Act, 1970, the term patentee as to
mean the person for the time being entered on
the register as the grantee or proprietor of the
patent.
What can be Patented?
An invention relating either to a product or
process that is new, involving inventive step and
capable of industrial application can be patented.
However, it must not fall into the categories of
inventions that are non- patentable under
sections 3 and 4 of the Act.
It may be noted that Section 2(1) (j) of the Act,
defines invention as to mean a new product or
process involving an inventive step and capable
of Industrial application.
Capable of industrial application, in relation to an
invention, means that the invention is capable of
being made or used in an industry as defined
under Section 2(1) (ac) of the Act.
Also, Section 2(1) (l) defines the term new
invention as to mean any invention or technology
which has not been anticipated by publication in
any document or used in the country or
elsewhere in the world before the date of filing of
patent application with complete specification,
i.e. the subject matter has not fallen into public
domain or that it does not form part of the state
of the art.
As per legal regime of Intellectual Property
Right, invention is something construed as new
substance or altogether new process having
inventive stage/action and potential of industrial
usage & relevance. Inventive stage/step include
certain aspects of action which are not palpable
& evident to the person experienced in the art.
The real purpose of patent system is stimulating
new innovative practices & technological
development to market for public interest.
In Raj Prakash v. Mangat Ram Choudhary AIR
1978 Delhi 1, it was held that inventive creation,
as is notable, is to discover something or find
something not found or found by anybody
previously. It isn't essential that the invention
ought to be anything confounded. The
fundamental thing is that the creator was first to
embrace it. The main issue in this manner, is
that each basic creation is asserted, as in the
form of novelty or new character, it will be
considered as an invention and the cases &
specifications must be perused in that light.
What are not inventions
The following are not inventions within the
meaning of Section 3 of the Act:
a) an invention which is frivolous or which claims
anything obviously contrary to well established
natural laws;
b) an invention the primary or intended use or
commercial exploitation of which could be
contrary to public order or morality or which
causes serious prejudice to human, animal or
plant life or health or to the environment;
c) the mere discovery of a scientific principle or
the formulation of an abstract theory or discovery
of any living thing or non-living substances
occurring in nature;
d) the mere discovery of a new form of a known
substance which does not result in the
enhancement of the known efficacy of that
substance or the mere discovery of any property
or mere new use for a known substance or of the
mere use of a known process, machine or
apparatus unless such known process results in
a new product or employs at least one new
reactant;
Explanation to clause (d) clarifies that salts,
esters, polymorphs, metabolites, pure form,
particle size, isomers, mixtures of isomers,
complexes, combinations and other derivatives
of known substance shall be considered to be
the same substance, unless they differ
significantly in properties with regard to efficacy.
e) a substance obtained by a mere admixture
resulting only in the aggregation of the
properties of the components thereof or a
process for producing such substance;
f) the mere arrangement or re-arrangement or
duplication of known devices each functioning
independently of one another in a known way;
g) a method of agriculture or horticulture;
h) any process for the medicinal, surgical,
curative, prophylactic diagnostic, therapeutic or
other treatment of human beings or any process
for a similar treatment of animals to render them
free of disease or to increase their economic
value or that of their products;
i) plants and animals in whole or any part thereof
other than micro-organisms but including seeds,
varieties and species and essentially biological
processes for production or propagation of plants
and animals;
j) a mathematical or business method or a
computer programme per se or algorithms;
k) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work or
any other aesthetic creation whatsoever
including cinematographic works and television
productions;
l) a mere scheme or rule or method of performing          a presentation of
mental act or method of playing game;                m)   information;
n) topography of integrated circuits;
o) an invention which in effect, is traditional
knowledge or which is an aggregation or
duplication of known properties of traditionally
known component or components;
Section 4 prohibits the grant of patent in respect
of an invention relating to atomic energy falling
within Sub- section (1) of Section 20 of the
Atomic Energy Act, 1962.
After analysing the legislative history of Section
3(d), the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of
Novartis AG Vs. Union of India, W.P.No.
24760/06, commented, "We have, therefore, no
doubt that the amendment/addition made in
section 3(d) is meant especially to deal with
chemical substances, and more particularly
pharmaceutical products. The amended portion
of section 3(d) clearly sets up a second tier of
qualifying standards for chemical substances/
pharmaceutical products in order to leave the
door open for true and genuine inventions but, at
the same time, to check any attempt at repetitive
patenting or extension of the patent term on
spurious grounds.
It was further held by the Apex Court :
In the case of medicines, efficacy means
therapeutic efficacy and physico-chemical
properties of substances do not meet the
requirement of therapeutic efficacy .
It was also held that patent applicants must
prove the increase in therapeutic efficacy and
just increased bioavailability alone may not
necessarily lead to an enhancement of
therapeutic efficacy, and in any given case,
enhanced efficacy must be specifically claimed
and established by research data.
In this regard, in Para 187 of the Apex Court
judgment, it is held that, "..........the physico-
chemical properties of beta crystalline form of
Imatinib Mesylate, namely (i) more beneficial flow
properties, (ii) better thermodynamic stability,
and (iii) lower hygroscopicity, may be otherwise
beneficial but these properties cannot even be
taken into account for the purpose of the test of
section 3(d) of the Act, since these properties
have nothing to do with therapeutic efficacy."
What are the Criteria of Patentability? An
invention is patentable subject matter if it meets
the following criteria -                              >   It should be novel.
> It should have inventive step or it must be non-
obvious.
> It should be capable of Industrial application.
> It should not attract the provisions of section 3
and 4 of the Patents Act, 1970.
It may be noted that Section 2(1) (ja) of the Act
defines the term inventive step as to mean a
feature of an invention that involves technical
advance as compared to the existing knowledge
or having economic significance or both that
makes the invention not obvious to a person
skilled in the art.
Persons Entitled to make Application for Patent
Section 6 of the Act provides that an application
for a patent for an invention may be made by any
of the following persons, that is to say:
a) by any person claiming to be the true and first
inventor of the invention;
b) by any person being the assignee of the
person claiming to be the true and first inventor
in respect of the right to make such an
application;
c) by the legal representative of any deceased
person who immediately before his death was
entitled to make such an application.
The application may be made by one of the
persons either alone or jointly with any other
person.
It may be noted that Section 2(1) (a) of the Act
defines the term assignee as to include the legal
representative of a deceased assignee, and
references to the assignee of any person include
references to the assignee of the legal
representative or assignee of that person.
Form of Application and Provisional & Complete
Specification
The Specification is a techno-legal document
containing scientific and technical disclosure and
claims for the invention which is the basis of
rights of a patent. The Specification, thus, forms
a crucial part of the patent application.
Section 7 dealing with form of application
requires every application for a patent to be
made for one invention only. Where the
application is made by virtue of an assignment
of the right to apply for a patent for the invention,
there shall be furnished with the application
proof of the right to make the application.
Every international application under the Patent
Cooperation Treaty (PCT) for a patent, as may
be filed designating India shall be deemed to be
an application under the Act, if a corresponding
application has also been filed before Controller
in India. The filing date of such application and
its complete specification processed by patent
office as designated office or elected office shall
be the international filing date accorded under
the PCT.

What is the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT)?
The PCT is an international treaty with more
than 150 Contracting States which are bound
with certain formal requirements set out in the
Treaty and Regulations. The PCT makes it
possible to seek patent protection for an
invention simultaneously in a large number of
countries by filing a single international patent
application instead of filing several separate
national or regional patent applications however,
granting of patents remains under the control of
the national or regional patent offices after the
corresponding national phase application has
been filed and the national phase application is
assessed as per patent law of that jurisdiction.
Section 7(4) provides that every such
application, not being a convention application or
an application filed under PCT designating India,
shall be accompanied by a provisional or a
complete specification.
Section 9 stipulates that where an application for
a patent (not being a convention application or
an application filed under PCT designating India)
is accompanied by a provisional specification, a
complete specification shall be filed within twelve
months from the date of filing of the application,
and if the complete specification is not so filed,
the application shall be deemed to be
abandoned. Where two or more applications in
the name of the same applicant are
accompanied by provisional specifications in
respect of inventions which are cognate or of
which one is a modification of another and the
Controller is of opinion that the whole of such
inventions are such as to constitute a single
invention and may properly be included in one
patent, he may allow one complete specification
to be filed in respect of all such provisional
specifications. However, the period of twelve
months shall be reckoned from the date of filing
of the earliest provisional specification.
Where an application for a patent (not being a
convention application or an application filed
under PCT designating India) is accompanied by
a specification purporting to be a complete
specification, the Controller may, if the applicant
so requests at any time within twelve months
from the date of filing of the application, direct
that such specification shall be treated as a
provisional specification and proceed with the
application accordingly. Where a complete
specification has been filed in pursuance of an
application for a patent accompanied by a
provisional specification or by a specification
treated by virtue of a direction under subsection
(3) as a provisional specification, the Controller
may, if the applicant so requests at any time
before the grant of patent, cancel the provisional
specification and post-date the application to the
date of filing of the complete specification.
When should an Application for a Patent be
Filed?
An application for a patent can be filed at the
earliest possible date and should not be delayed.
An application filed with provisional specification,
disclosing the essence of the nature of the
invention helps to register the priority of the
invention. Delay in filing an application may
entail some risks such as:
(i) some other inventor might file a patent
application on the said invention and
(ii) there may be either an inadvertent publication
of the invention by the inventor himself/herself or
by others independently of him/her.

Section 10 dealing with contents of
Specifications provides that every specification,
whether provisional or complete, shall describe
the invention and begin with a title sufficiently
indicating the subject matter to which the
invention relates.
Every complete specification is required to -
a) fully and particularly describe the invention
and its operation or use and the method by
which it is to be performed;
b) disclose the best method of performing the
invention which is known to the applicant and for
which he is entitled to claim protection;
c) end with a claim or claims defining the scope
of the invention for which protection is claimed;
and
d) be accompanied by an abstract to provide
technical information on the invention.
However, the Controller may amend the abstract
for providing better information to third parties
and if the applicant mentions a biological
material in the specification which may not be
described in such a way as to satisfy clauses (a)
and (b) above and if such material is not
available to the public, the application shall be
completed by depositing the material to an
International Depository Authority under the
Budapest Treaty and by fulfilling the following
conditions, namely:
(i) the deposit of the material shall be made not
later than the date of filing the patent application
in India and a reference thereof shall be made in
the specification within the prescribed period;
(ii) all the available characteristics of the material
required for it to be correctly identified or
indicated are included in the specification
including the name, address of the depository
institution and the date and number of the
deposit of the material at the institution;
(iii) access to the material is available in the
depository institution only after the date of the
application for patent in India or if a priority is
claimed after the date of the priority;
(iv) disclose the source and geographical origin
of the biological material in the specification,
when used in an invention.
In case of an international application
designating India the title, description, drawings,
abstracts and claims filed with the application
shall be taken as the complete specification for
the purposes of the Act.
The claim or claims of a complete specification
shall relate to a single invention, or to a group of
inventions linked so as to form a single inventive
concept, shall be clear and succinct and shall be
fairly based on the matter disclosed in the
specification.
Any kind of innovation/invention is patented for
making monetary profit and that it can be
identified further when it got the status of
exclusivity in a commercial market. A feature of
exclusivity or monopoly is attained when
description in patent specification is clear on the
part of being novel. Patentee can rightfully
exploit his monopoly either by utilizing
marketable strategies over patented product or
by licensing the same to a different person. A
patentee also has privilege to assign the
invention to third person by way of deed. Special
thing about patented invention is that its
monetary value can increase with passage of
time. Right of licensing is also one of the
acceptable way to commercially exploit patented
invention and prevent it from any possible kind of
unauthorized usage and patent holder can retain
exclusive commercial right.
How a Patent Specification is prepared?
A patent specification can be prepared by the
applicant himself or his registered and
authorized agent. The patent specification
generally comprises of the title of the invention
indicating its technical field, prior art, draw backs
in the prior art, the solution provided by the
inventor to obviate the drawbacks of the prior art,
a concise but sufficient description of the
invention and its usefulness, drawings (if any)
and details of best method of its working. The
complete specification must contain atleast one
claim or statement of claims defining the scope
of the invention for which protection is sought for.
Publication of Applications
Section 11A(1) provides that save as provided
otherwise, no application for patents shall
ordinarily be open to public for such period as
may be prescribed. Sub-section (2) entitles an
applicant to request the Controller, in the
prescribed manner, to publish his application at
any time before the expiry of the period
prescribed under sub-section (1) and subject to
the provisions of sub-section (3). The Controller
on receipt of such request shall publish such
application as soon as possible. Every
application for patent shall be published on
expiry of the period specified in sub-section (1)
except those applications in which secrecy
direction is imposed under section 35; or
application has been abandoned under section
9(1); or application has been withdrawn three
months prior to the period specified under sub-
section (1).
The publication of every application shall include
the particulars of the date of application, number
of application, name and address of the
applicant identifying the application and an
abstract. Upon publication of an application for a
patent, the depository institution shall make the
biological material mentioned in the specification
available to the public. The patent office may, on
payment of prescribed fee make the
specification and drawings, if any, of such
application available to the public.
Section 11A(7) provides that on or from the date
of publication of the application for patent and
until the date of grant of a patent in respect of
such application, the applicant shall have the like
privileges and rights as if a patent for invention
had been granted on the date of publication of
application. However, the applicant shall have no
right to institute any proceedings for infringement
until the patent has been granted. Additionally,
the rights of a patentee in respect of applications
made under Section 5(2) before January 1,2005
shall accrue from the date of grant of patent.
Moreover, after the patent is granted in respect
of applications made under Section 5(2), the
patent holder shall only be entitled to receive
reasonable royalty from such enterprises which
have made significant investment and were
producing and marketing concerned product
prior to January 1, 2005 and which continue to
manufacture the product covered by the patent
on the date of grant of the patent and no
infringement proceedings shall be instituted
against such enterprises.
When is an Application for Patent Published?
Every application for patent is published after
expiry of 18 months from the date of its filing or
priority date whichever is earlier. However,
following applications are not published.
(A) Application in which secrecy direction is
imposed.
(B) Application which has been abandoned u/s
9(1) and i.e. when a provisional application has
been filed and the complete application has not
been filed with 12 months from the filing of the
provisional application.
(C) Application which has been withdrawn 3
months prior to 18 months.

Request for Examination
Section 11B provides that no application for a
patent shall be examined unless the applicant or
any other interested person makes a request in
the prescribed manner for such examination
within the prescribed period. In case of an
application in respect of a claim for a patent filed
under Section 5(2) before January1, 2005, a
request for examination shall be made in the
prescribed manner for such examination within
the prescribed period, by the applicant or any
other interested person.
In case the applicant or any other interested
person does not make a request for examination
of the application for a patent within the specified
period, the application shall be treated as
withdrawn by the applicant. However the
applicant may, at any time after filing the
application but before the grant of the patent,
withdraw the application by making a request in
the prescribed manner; and in a case secrecy
direction has been issued under Section 35, the
request for examination may be made within the
prescribed period from the date of revocation of
the secrecy direction.
Examination of Application
Section 12 dealing with examination of
application provides that when the request for
examination has been filed in respect of an
application for a patent in the prescribed manner
under Section 11B (1) or (3), the application and
specification and other documents related
thereto shall be referred at the earliest by the
Controller to an examiner for making a report to
him in respect of the following matters, namely:
a) whether the application and the specification
and other documents relating thereto are in
accordance with the requirements of the Act and
of any rules made thereunder;
b) whether there is any lawful ground of objection
to the grant of the patent in pursuance of the
application;
c) the result of investigations made under
Section 13; and
d) any other matter which may be prescribed.
The examiner to whom the application and the
specification and other documents relating
thereto are referred shall ordinarily make the
report to the Controller within the prescribed
period.
Search for Anticipation by Previous Publication
and by Prior Claim
Section 13 dealing with search for anticipation by
previous publication and by prior claim provides
that the examiner to whom the application for a
patent is referred shall make investigation for the
purpose of ascertaining whether the invention so
far as claimed in any claim of the complete
specification:
(a) has been anticipated by publication before
the date of filing of the applicant's complete
specification in any specification filed in
pursuance of an application for a patent made in
India and dated on or after the 1st day of
January, 1912;
(b) is claimed in any claim of any other complete
specification published on or after the date of
filing of the applicant's complete specification,
being a specification filed in pursuance of an
application for a patent made in India and dated
before or claiming the priority date earlier than
that date.
The examiner shall, in addition, make such
investigation for the purpose of ascertaining
whether the invention so far as claimed in any
claim of the complete specification has been
anticipated by publication in India or elsewhere
in any document other than those mentioned in
Section 13(1) before the date of filing of the
applicant's complete specification. In case a
complete specification has been amended
before the grant of a patent, the amended
specification shall be examined and investigated
in the like manner as the original specification.
Consideration of the Report of Examiner by
Controller
Section 14 provides that in case the report of the
examiner is adverse to the applicant and
requires any amendment of the application,
specification or other documents, the Controller
shall, before proceeding to dispose of the
application, communicate the gist of obligations
to the applicant as expeditiously as possible and
afford him an opportunity of hearing.
Power of Controller to Refuse or Require
Amended Application in Certain matters
Section 15 empowers the Controller to refuse
the application or to require the application,
specification or other documents to be amended,
if he is satisfied that the application or any
specification or any other document filed in
pursuance thereof does not comply with the
provisions of the Act and the rules made
thereunder.
Power of Controller to make Orders Respecting
Dating of Application and Cases of Anticipation
Section 17 provides that at any time after the
filing of an application and before the grant of
the patent, the Controller may at the request of
the applicant direct that the application shall be
post-dated to such date as may be specified in
the request and proceed with the application
accordingly. However, no application shall be
post-dated to a date later than six months from
the date on which it was actually made or would
be deemed to have been made.
Where an application or specification (including
drawings) or any other document is required to
be amended under Section 15, the application or
specification or other document shall, if the
Controller so directs, be deemed to have been
made on the date on which the requirement is
complied with or where the application or
specification or other document is returned to the
applicant, the date on which it is refiled after
complying with the requirement.
Section 18 says that where it appears to the
Controller that the invention so far as claimed in
any claim of the complete specification has been
anticipated, he may refuse the application unless
the applicant:
a) shows to the satisfaction of the Controller that
the priority date of the claim of his complete
specification is not later than the date on which
the relevant document was published; or
b) amends his complete specification to the
satisfaction of the Controller.
If it appears to the Controller that the invention is
claimed in a claim of any other complete
specification, he may, direct that a reference to
that other specification be inserted in the
applicant's complete specification unless the
applicant shows to the satisfaction of the
Controller that the priority date of his claim is not
later than the priority date of the claim of the said
other specification; or the complete specification
has been amended to his satisfaction.
Similar provision also applies in the case where
it appears to the Controller that the invention so
far claimed in any claim of the applicant's
complete specification has been claimed in other
complete specification referred to in section
13(1)(a) and that such other complete
specification was published on or before the
priority date of the applicant's claim.
Potential Infringement
Patent infringement is the violation of the
exclusive rights of the patent holder. The
Patents Act 1970, does not specifically define
activities or situations that constitute patent
infringement. Section 48 of the Patents Act gives
the patent holder/ patentee an 'exclusive right' to
exclude any third- party from making, using,
offering, selling, manufacturing etc. the patented
invention/ product/ process, during the valid term
of the patent. This essentially creates
monopolistic rights over the patented invention/
product/ process. Thus, any activity which
violates such a monopoly can be considered a
patent infringement. In cases of patent
infringement, the patent holder has the right to
sue the infringing party to get relief and
compensation for the damage caused. Sections
104-114 of the Act provide certain guidelines
relating to patent infringement.
Section 19 provides that if in consequence of the
investigations it appears to the Controller that an
invention in respect of which an application for a
patent has been made cannot be performed
without substantial risk of infringement of a claim
of any other patent, he may direct that a
reference to that other patent, be inserted in the
applicant's complete specification by way of
notice to the public within such time as may be
prescribed, unless
a) the applicant shows to the satisfaction of the
Controller that there are reasonable grounds for
contesting the validity of the said claim of the
other patent; or
b) the complete specification is amended to the
satisfaction of the Controller.
The reference shall be inserted in the following
form, namely:
Reference has been directed, in pursuance of
Section 19(2) of the Patents Act, 1970 to Patent
No........
Where after a reference to another patent has
been inserted in a complete specification in
pursuance of a direction under Section 19(1):
a) that other patent is revoked or otherwise
ceases to be in force; or
b) the specification of that other patent is
amended by the deletion of the relevant claim; or
c) it is found, in proceedings before the court or
the Controller, that the relevant claim of that
other patent is invalid or is not infringed by any
working of the applicant's invention, the
Controller may, on the application of the
applicant delete the reference to that other
patent.
Substitution of Applicants
Section 20 says that if the Controller is satisfied,
on a claim made in prescribed manner at any
time before a patent has been granted that by
virtue of any assignment or agreement in writing
made by the applicant or one of the applicants
for the patent or by operation of law, the claimant
would, if the patent were then granted, be
entitled thereto or to the interest of the applicant
therein, or to an undivided share of the patent or
of that interest, the Controller may direct that the
application shall proceed in the name of the
claimant or in the names of the claimants and
the applicant or the other joint applicant or
applicants, accordingly as the case may be. No
such direction shall however, be given by virtue
of any assignment or agreement made by one of
the two or more joint applicants for a patent
except with the consent of the other joint
applicant or applicants. Further, no such
direction shall be given by virtue of any
assignment or agreement for the assignment of
the benefit of an invention unless:
a) the invention is identified therein by reference
to the number of the applications for the patent;
or
b) there is produced to the Controller an
acknowledgement by the person by whom the
assignment or agreement was made that the
assignment or agreement relates to the invention
in respect of which that application is made; or
c) the rights of the claimant in respect of the
invention have been finally established by the
decision of court; or
d) the Controller gives directions for enabling the
application to proceed or for regulating the
manner in which it should be proceeded with
under sub-section (5).
Where one of the two or more joint applicants for
a patent dies at any time before the patent has
been granted, the Controller may upon a request
made by the survivor or survivors and with the
consent of the legal representative of the
deceased direct that the application shall
proceed in the name of the survivor or survivors
alone.
If any dispute arises between joint applicants for
a patent whether or in what manner the
application should be proceeded with, the
Controller may upon an application made by any
of the parties, and after giving to all parties
concerned an opportunity of being heard, give
such directions as he thinks fit for enabling the
application to proceed in the name of one or
more of the parties alone or for regulating the
manner in which it should be proceeded with.
Time for Putting Application in Order for grant
Section 21 of the Act provides that an
application for a patent shall be deemed to have
been abandoned unless, the applicant has
complied within the prescribed period with all the
requirements imposed on him by or under the
Act, whether in connection with the complete
specification or otherwise in relation to the
application from the date on which the first
statement of objections to the application or
complete specification or other documents
related thereto is forwarded to the applicant by
the Controller.
Explanation to section 21(1) clarifies that where
the application for a patent or any specification
or, in the case of a convention application or an
application filed under the PCT designating India
any document filed as part of the application has
been returned to the applicant by the Controller
in the course of the proceedings, the applicant
shall not be deemed to have complied with such
requirements unless and until he has re-filed it or
the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Controller that for the reasons beyond his control
such document could not be re-filed.
Sub-section (2) of Section 21 provides that if at
the expiration of the period as prescribed under
sub-section (1) an appeal to the High Court is
pending in respect of the application for the
patent for the main invention; or in the case of
an application for a patent of addition, an appeal
to the High Court is pending in respect of either
that application or the application for the main
invention, the time within which the requirements
of the Controller shall be complied with shall, on
an application made by the applicant before the
expiration of the period as prescribed under sub-
section (1), be extended until such date as the
High Court may determine. In case, the time
within which the appeal mentioned in sub-section
(2) may be instituted has not expired, the
Controller may extend the period as prescribed
under sub-section (1), to such further period as
he may determine. However, in case of an
appeal filed during the said further period, and
the High Court has granted any extension of time
for complying with the requirements of the
Controller, then the requirements may be
complied with within the time granted by the
Court.
OPPOSITION TO THE PATENT
Section 25 of the Act deals with opposition to
grant of patent and provides that where an
application for a patent has been published but a
patent has not been granted, any person may, in
writing, represent by way of opposition to the
Controller against the grant of patent on the
following grounds and the Controller on request
of such person shall hear him and dispose of the
representation in the prescribed manner and
specified time:
(a) that the applicant for the patent or the person
under or through whom he claims, wrongfully
obtained the invention or any part thereof from
him or from a person under or through whom he
claims;
(b) that the invention so far as claimed in any
claim of the complete specification has been
published before the priority date of the claim -
(i) in any specification filed in pursuance of an
application for a patent made in India on or after
the 1st day of January, 1912; or
(ii) in India or elsewhere, in any other document.
Provided that the ground specified in sub-clause
(ii) shall not be available where such publication
does not constitute an anticipation of the
invention by virtue of sub-section (2) or sub-
section (3) of section 29;
(c) that the invention so far as claimed in any
claim of the complete specification is claimed in
a claim of a complete specification published on
or after the priority date of the applicant's claim
and filed in pursuance of an application for a
patent in India, being a claim of which the priority
date is earlier than that of the applicant's claim;
(d) that the invention so far as claimed in any
claim of the complete specification was publicly
known or publicly used in India before the priority
date of that claim.
Explanation - For the purposes of this clause, an
invention relating to a process for which a patent
is claimed shall be deemed to have been
publicly known or publicly used in India before
the priority date of the claim if a product made by
that process had already been imported into
India before that date except where such
importation has been for the purpose of
reasonable trial or experiment only;
(e) that the invention so far as claimed in any
claim of the complete specification is obvious
and clearly
does not involve any inventive step, having
regard to the matter published as mentioned in
clause (b) or having regard to what was used in
India before the priority date of the applicant's
claim;
(f) that the subject of any claim of the complete
specification is not an invention within the
meaning of this Act, or is not patentable under
this Act;
(g) that the complete specification does not
sufficiently and clearly describe the invention or
the method by which it is to be performed;
(h) that the applicant has failed to disclose to the
Controller the information required by section 8
or has furnished the information which in any
material particular was false to his knowledge;
(i) that in the case of convention application, the
application was not made within twelve months
from the date of the first application for
protection for the invention made in a convention
country by the applicant or a person from whom
he derives title;
(j) that the complete specification does not
disclose or wrongly mention the source of
geographical origin of biological material used
for the invention;
(k) that the invention so far as claimed in any
claim of the complete specification is anticipated
having regard to the knowledge, oral or
otherwise, available within any local or
indigenous community in India or elsewhere.
Section 25(2) entitles any interested person to
give notice of opposition, to the Controller in the
prescribed manner at any time after the grant of
patent but before the expiry of a period of one
year from the date of publication of grant of a
patent, on any of the following grounds only :-
(a) that the patentee or the person under or
through whom he claims, wrongfully obtained
the invention or any part thereof from him or from
a person under or through whom he claims;
(b) that the invention so far as claimed in any
claim of the complete specification has been
published before the priority date of the claim in
any specification filed in pursuance of an
application for a patent made in India on or after
the 1st day of January, 1912; or in India or
elsewhere, in any other document. However, the
ground that the invention so far claimed in any
claim of complete specification has been
published before the priority date of the claim in
India or elsewhere in any other document shall
not be available where such publication does not
constitute an anticipation of the invention by
virtue of section 29(2) or (3);
(c) that the invention so far as claimed in any
claim of the complete specification is claimed in
a claim of a complete specification published on
or after the priority date of the claim of the
patentee and filed in pursuance of an application
for a patent in India, being a claim of which the
priority date is earlier than that of the claim of the
patentee;
(d) that the invention so far as claimed in any
claim of the complete specification was publicly
known or publicly used in India before the priority
date of that claim;
It may be noted that an invention relating to a
process for which a patent is granted shall be
deemed to have been publicly known or publicly
used in India before the priority date of the claim
if a product made by that process had already
been imported into India before that date except
where such importation has been for the purpose
of reasonable trial or experiment only;
(e) that the invention so far as claimed in any
claim of the complete specification is obvious
and clearly
does not involve any inventive step, having
regard to the matter published as mentioned in
clause (b) or having regard to what was used in
India before the priority date of the claim;
(f) that the subject of any claim of the complete
specification is not an invention within the
meaning of this Act, or is not patentable under
this Act;
(g) that the complete specification does not
sufficiently and clearly describe the invention or
the method by which it is to be performed;
(h) that the patentee has failed to disclose to the
Controller the information required by section 8
or has furnished the information which in any
material particular was false to his knowledge;
(i) that in the case of a patent granted on
convention application, the application for patent
was not made within twelve months from the
date of the first application for protection for the
invention made in a convention country or in
India by the patentee or a person from whom he
derives title;
(j) that the complete specification does not
disclose or wrongly mentions the source and
geographical origin of biological material used
for the invention;
(k) that the invention so far as claimed in any
claim of the complete specification was
anticipated having regard to the knowledge, oral
or otherwise, available within any local or
indigenous community in India or elsewhere.
Constitution of Opposition board and its
proceeding
Section 25(3) provides that where any such
notice of opposition is duly given under sub-
section (2), the Controller shall notify the
patentee and constitute a Board by order in
writing to be known as the Opposition Board
consisting of such officers as he may determine
and refer such notice of opposition alongwith the
documents to that Board for examination and
submission of its recommendation. Every
Opposition Board is required to conduct the
examination in accordance with the prescribed
procedure. Sub-section (4) provides that the
Controller shall on receipt of the
recommendation of the Opposition Board and
after giving the patentee and the opponent an
opportunity of being heard, order either to
maintain or amend or revoke the patent.
However, the Controller while passing the order
shall not take into account any personal
document or secret trial or secret use in case the
opposition is based on the grounds mentioned
under sub-section (2)(d) & (e). In case the
Controller issues an order under sub-section (4)
that the patent shall be maintained subject to
amendment of the specification or any other
document, the patent shall stand amended
accordingly.
Controller to Treat Application as Application of
Opponent
Section 26 of the Act provides that where in any
opposition proceeding the Controller finds that
the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of
the complete specification, was obtained from
the opponent in the manner set out in section
25(2)(a) and revokes the patent on that ground,
he may, on request by such opponent made in
the prescribed manner, direct that the patent
shall stand amended in the name of the
opponent; or a part of an invention described in
the complete specification was so obtained from
the opponent, he may pass an order requiring
that the specification be amended by the
exclusion of that part of the invention.
Where an opponent has, before the date of the
order of the Controller requiring the amendment
of a complete specification referred to in section
26(1)(b), filed an application for a patent for an
invention which included the whole or a part of
the invention held to have been obtained from
him and such application is pending, the
Controller may treat such application and
specification in so far as they relate to the
invention held to have been obtained from him,
as having been filed, for the purposes of the
priority dates of claims of the complete
specification, on the date on which the
corresponding document was or deemed to have
been filed by the patentee in the earlier
application but for all other purposes the
application of the opponent shall be proceeded
with as an application for a patent.
RESIDENTS NOT TO APPLY FOR PATENTS
OUTSIDE INDIA WITHOUT PRIOR
PERMISSION
Section 39 of the Act provides that no person
resident in India shall, except under the authority
of a written permit sought in the prescribed
manner and granted by or on behalf of the
Controller, make or cause to be made any
application outside India for the grant of a patent
for an invention unless an application for a
patent for the same invention has been made in
India, not less than six weeks before the
application outside India and either no direction
has been given under of section 35(1) in relation
to the application in India, or all such directions
have been revoked.
Sub-section (2) obliges the Controller to dispose
of every such application within the prescribed
period. However, if the invention is relevant for
defence purpose or atomic energy, the Controller
shall not grant permit without the prior consent of
the Central Government. Sub-section (3) clarifies
that the provisions of section 39 shall not apply
in relation to an invention for which an
application for protection has first been filed in a
country outside India by a person resident
outside India.
gRANT OF PATENTS
Section 43 dealing with grant of patents provides
that where an application for a patent has been
found to be in order for grant of the patent and
either the application has not been refused by
the Controller by virtue of any power vested in
him by the Act; or the application has not been
found to be in contravention of any of the
provisions of the Act, the patent shall be granted
as expeditiously as possible to the applicant or,
in the case of a joint application, to the
applicants jointly, with the seal of the patent
office and the date on which the patent is
granted shall be entered in the register. The
Controller has been put under obligation to
publish the fact that the patent has been granted
and thereupon the application, specification and
other documents related thereto shall be open
for public inspection.
grant of Patents Subject to Conditions
Section 47 dealing with grant of patents subject
to conditions provides that the grant of a patent
shall be subject to the conditions that:
(1) any machine, apparatus or other article in
respect of which the patent is granted or any
article made by using a process in respect of
which the patent is granted, may be imported or
made by or on behalf of the Government for the
purpose merely of its own use;
(2) any process in respect of which the patent is
granted may be used by or on behalf of the
Government for the purpose merely of its own
use;
(3) any machine, apparatus or other article in
respect of which the patent is granted or any
article made by the use of the process in respect
of which the patent is granted, may be made or
used, and any process in respect of which the
patent is granted may be used by any person,
for the purpose merely of experiment or research
including the imparting of instructions to pupils;
and
(4) in the case of a patent in respect of any
medicine or drug, the medicine or drug may be
imported by the Government for the purpose
merely of its own use or for distribution in any
dispensary, hospital or other medical institution
maintained by or on behalf of the Government or
any other dispensary, hospital or other medical
institution which the Central Government may,
having regard to the public service that such
dispensary, hospital or medical institution
renders, specify in this behalf by notification in
the Official Gazette.
Rights of Patentees
Section 48 provides that subject to the other
provisions contained in the Patents Act and the
conditions specified in section 47, a patent
granted under the Act shall confer upon the
patentee:
(a) where the subject matter of the patent is a
product, the exclusive right to prevent third
parties, who do not have his consent, from the
act of making, using, offering for sale, selling or
importing for those purposes that product in
India;
(b) where the subject matter of the patent is a
process, the exclusive right to prevent third
parties, who do not have his consent, from the
act of using that process, and from the act of
using, offering for sale, selling or importing for
those purposes the product obtained directly by
that process in India.
What are the Rights of a Patentee once the
Patent is Granted?
A patentee enjoys the exclusive right to make
and use the patented invention. The patentee
also has the right to assign the patent, grant
licences, or otherwise deal with the patent, for
any consideration. These rights, created by
statute, are circumscribed by various conditions
and limitations as prescribed under the Patents
Act, 1970.
Term of Patent
According to Section 53 of the Act, the term of
every patent which has not expired and has not
ceased to have effect, on the date of such
commencement shall be twenty years from the
date of filing of the application for the patent.
The term of patent in case of International
applications filed under the Patent Cooperation
Treaty designating India, shall be twenty years
from the international filing date accorded under
the Patent Cooperation Treaty.
A patent shall cease to have effect
notwithstanding anything therein or in the Act on
the expiration of the period prescribed for the
payment of any renewal fee, if that fee is not
paid within the prescribed period or within such
extended period as may be prescribed.
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other
law for the time being in force, on cessation of
the patent right due to non-payment of renewal
fee or on the expiry of the term of patent, the
subject matter covered by the said patent shall
not be entitled to any protection.
What is the Term of a Patent in the Indian
System?
The term of every patent granted is 20 years
from the date of filing of application. However,
for application filed under national phase under
Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), the term of
patent will be 20 years from the international
filing date accorded under PCT.
PATENTS OF ADDITION
Section 54, 55 and 56 deals with patents of
addition. Section 54 provides that where an
application is made for a patent in respect of any
improvement in or modification of an invention
described or disclosed in the complete
specification, namely the main invention and the
applicant also applies or has applied for a patent
for that invention or is the patentee in respect
thereof, the Controller may, if the applicant so
requests, grant the patent for the improvement
or modification as a patent of addition. Where an
invention being an improvement in or
modification of another invention, is the subject
of an independent patent and the patentee in
respect of that patent is also the patentee in
respect of the patent for the main invention, the
Controller may, if the patentee so requests,
revoke the patent for the improvement or
modification and grant to the patentee a patent
of addition in respect thereof, bearing the same
date of the patent so revoked. However a patent
shall not be granted as a patent of addition
unless the date of filing of the application is the
same as or later than the date of filing of the
application in respect of the main invention. A
patent of addition shall not be granted before the
grant of the patent for the main invention.

Section 55 deals with term of patents of addition
and provides that a patent of addition is granted
for a term equal to that of the patent for the main
invention or so much thereof as has not expired
and remains in force during that term or until the
previous cessor of the patent for the main
invention and no longer. No renewal fees is
payable in respect of a patent of addition, but if
any such patent becomes an independent patent
the same fees shall thereafter be payable upon
the same dates, as if the patent had been
originally granted as an independent patent.
Section 56 which deals with validity of patents of
addition provides that the grant of a patent of
addition shall not be refused and a patent
granted as a patent of addition shall not be
revoked or invalidated, on the ground only that
the invention claimed in the complete
specification does not involve any inventive step
having regard to any publication or use of the
main invention described in the complete
specification relating thereto; or any
improvement in or modification of the main
invention described in the complete specification
of a patent of addition to the patent for the main
invention or of an application for such a patent of
addition, and the validity of a patent of addition
shall not be questioned on the ground that the
invention ought to have been the subject of an
independent patent. In this context, it is clarified
that in determining the novelty of the invention
claimed in the complete specification filed in
pursuance of an application for a patent of
addition regard shall be had also to the complete
specification in which the main invention is
described.
A patent of addition application cannot be
rejected on the grounds that the disclosure in the
primary application or patent lacked innovative
step. However, the disclosure in the main
application or patent may be used as evidence
of innovation against the patent addition
application.
In the matter of Ravi Kamal Bali v/s Kala Tech
and others the Bombay High Court on 12th
February, 2008 dismissed the defendant's
arguments that Patent of addition can only be
granted if it has an inventive step over the main
application.
RESTORATION OF LAPSED PATENTS
Section 60 provides that where a patent has
ceased to have effect by reason of failure to pay
any renewal fee within the period prescribed
under section 53 or within period as may be
allowed under section 142(4), the patentee or his
legal representative and where the patent was
held by two or more persons jointly, then with the
leave of the Controller one or more of them
without joining the others, may within eighteen
months from the date on which the patent
ceased to have effect, make an application for
the restoration of the patent.
Procedure for disposal of applications for
restoration of lapsed patents
Section 61 provides that if, after hearing the
applicant in cases where the applicant so desires
or the Controller thinks fit, the Controller is prima
facie satisfied that the failure to pay the renewal
fee was unintentional and that there has been no
undue delay in the making of the application, he
shall publish the application in the prescribed
manner; and within the prescribed period, any
person interested may give notice to the
Controller of opposition thereto on either or both
of the following grounds that - (a) the failure to
pay the renewal fee was not unintentional; or

                                                              there has been
                                                              undue delay in the
                                                              making of the
                                                        (b)   application.
If notice of opposition is given within the
prescribed period aforesaid, the Controller shall
notify the applicant, and shall give to him and to
the opponent an opportunity to be heard before
deciding the case. If no notice of opposition is
given within the prescribed period aforesaid or if
in the case of opposition, the decision of the
Controller is in favour of the applicant, the
Controller shall, upon payment of any unpaid
renewal fee and such additional fee as may be
prescribed, restore the patent and any patent of
addition specified in the application which has
ceased to have effect on the cesser of that
patent. The Controller may, if he thinks fit as a
condition of restoring the patent, require that an
entry shall be made in the register of any
document or matter which has to be entered in
the register but which has not been so entered.
Rights of patentees of lapsed patents which
have been restored
Section 62 provides that where a patent is
restored, the rights of the patentee shall be
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed
and to such other conditions as the Controller
thinks fit to impose for the protection or
compensation of persons who may have begun
to avail themselves of, or have taken definite
steps by contract or otherwise to avail
themselves of, the patented invention between
the date when the patent ceased to have effect
and the date of the publication of the application
for restoration of the patent. No suit or other
proceeding shall be commenced or prosecuted
in respect of an infringement of a patent
committed between the date on which the patent
ceased to have effect and the date of the
publication of the application for restoration of
the patent.
SURRENDER AND REvOCATION OF
PATENTS
Section 63 entitles the patentee to offer to
surrender his patent, at any time by giving notice
to the Controller. Where such an offer is made,
the Controller shall publish the offer in the
prescribed manner and also notify every person
other than the patentee whose name appears in
the register as having an interest in the patent.
Any person interested may, within the prescribed
period after such publication, give notice of
opposition to the Controller and where such
notice in given the Controller shall notify the
patentee. If the Controller is satisfied after
hearing the patentee and any opponent, if
desirous of being heard, that the patent may
properly be surrendered, he may accept the offer
and by order revoke the patent.
grounds for Revocation of Patents
Section 64 deals with revocation of patents. A
patent may be revoked on any of the following
grounds:
* where an invention as claimed in a valid claim
of earlier priority date which is included in the
complete specification of another patent granted
in India;
* where the patent application was filed by a
person who is not entitled under the provisions
of the Act and was granted a patent on such
application;
* where the patent was wrongfully obtained and
the rights of the petitioner or any person
under/through whom he claims, were
contravened;
* when the subject of a claim of the complete
specification is not an invention within the
meaning of the Act;
* where the invention that is being claimed is not
new having regard to what was publicly known or
used in India before the priority date of the claim
and also having regard to what was published in
any of the documents, whether in India or
elsewhere;
* where the invention that is claimed is obvious
and lacks any inventive step, having regard to
what was publicly known, used or published in
India, before the priority date of the claim;
* where the invention is not useful;
* where the invention and the method by which it
is to be performed is not sufficiently and fairly
described by the complete specification. In other
words, the description of the method or the
instructions for the working of the invention as
specified in the complete specification are
insufficient to enable a person of average skill
and knowledge of the art to which the invention
relates, to operate or work the invention or where
the best method of performing the invention
which is known to the applicant is not disclosed;
* where the scope of any claim is not defined
properly or based on the matter which his not
disclosed in the specification;
* where a false suggestion or representation was
made to obtain the patent;
                                                                                              ? where the
                                                                                              information
                                                                                              required under
                                                                                              Section 8 has
                                                                                              not been
                                                                                              disclosed by
                                                                                              the applicant of
                                                                                              the patent to
                                                                                              the Controller
                                                                         the invention that or the
                                                                         is being claimed information that
                                                                         was secretly used has been
                                                                         in India before the furnished is
* where the subject of any claim of the complete                         priority date of the false to his
specification is not patentable under the Act;         ?                 claim;               knowledge;
* where any direction of secrecy passed under
Section 35 has been contravened by the
applicant or made an application in
contravention of Section 39 for the grant of a
patent outside India;
* where the permission to amend the complete
specification under Section 57 or 58 was
obtained by fraud;
* the complete specification does not disclose or
mentions the wrong source or geographical
origin of biological material used for the
invention;
* the invention was anticipated having regard to
the knowledge which was available within any
local or indigenous community within India or
elsewhere.
                                                       ? a personal
                                                       document,
However, where the invention claimed is not            secret trial or
new, obvious or lacks any inventive step, having secret use
regard to what was publicly known or used in           shall not be
India or published in India or elsewhere, before taken into
the priority date of the claim:                        account;
* where the patent is for a process or for a
product that is made by a process which is
claimed, the importation of the product which is
made abroad by that process into India will
constitute knowledge or use in India of the
invention, on the date of importation. Except
where the product has been imported for the
purpose of reasonable trial or experiment only.
Furthermore, on a petition of the Central
Government, the High Court may revoke a
patent if it is satisfied that the patentee has failed
to comply with the request of the Central
Government, without any reasonable cause to
make, use or exercise the invention which has
been granted a patent for the Government's
purpose, within the meaning of Section 99 of the
Act. The petition for revocation of a patent
should be notified to all persons mentioned in the
register who are proprietors of that patent or
have a share or interest in the patent.
Section 65 deals with revocation of patent and
amendment of complete specification on
directions of the Government in cases relating to
atomic energy and section 66 deals with
revocation of patents in public interest. Section
65 provides that where at any time after grant of
a patent, the Central Government is satisfied that
a patent is for an invention relating to atomic
energy for which no patent can be granted under
sub-section (1) of section 20 of the Atomic
Energy Act, 1962, it may direct the Controller to
revoke the patent, and thereupon the Controller,
after giving notice, to the patentee and every
other person whose name has been entered in
the register as having an interest in the patent,
and after giving them an opportunity of being
heard, may revoke the patent. Sub-section 2
empowers the Controller allow the patentee to
amend the complete specification in such
manner as he considers necessary instead of
revoking the patent.
WORKINg OF PATENTED INvENTIONS -
gENERAL PRINCIPLES
Section 83 dealing with general principles
applicable to working of patented invention
provides that in exercising the powers conferred
for working of patents and compulsory licences,
regard shall be had to the following general
considerations, namely:
a) that patents are granted to encourage
inventions and to secure that the inventions are
worked in India on a commercial scale and to the
fullest extent that is reasonably practicable
without undue delay;
b) that they are not granted merely to enable
patentees to enjoy a monopoly for the
importation of the patented article;
                                                       It may be noted
                                                       that Section 2(1)
                                                       (o) of the Act
                                                       defines the term
                                                       patented article
                                                       and patented
                                                       process as to
                                                       mean respectively
                                                       an article or
                                                       process in respect
                                                       of which a patent
                                                       is in force;
c) that the protection and enforcement of patent
rights contribute to the promotion of
technological innovation and to the transfer and
dissemination of technology, to the mutual
advantage of producers and users of
technological knowledge and in a manner
conducive to social and economic welfare, and
to a balance of rights and obligations;
d) that patents granted do not impede protection
of public health and nutrition and should act as
instrument to promote public interest specially in
sectors of vital importance for socio-economic
and technological development of India;
e) that patents granted do not in any way prohibit
Central Government in taking measures to
protect public health;
f) that the patent right is not abused by the
patentee or person deriving title or interest on
patent from the patentee, and the patentee or a
person deriving title or interest on patent from
the patentee does not resort to practices which
unreasonably restrain trade or adversely affect
the international transfer of technology; and
g) that patents are granted to make the benefit of
the patented invention available at reasonably
affordable prices to the public.
COMPULSORY LICENCES
Compulsory licenses are authorizations given to
a third-party by the Controller General to make,
use or sell a particular product or use a particular
process which has been patented, without the
need of the permission of the patent owner. This
concept is recognised at both national as well as
international levels, with express mention in both
(Indian) Patent Act, 1970 and TRIPS Agreement.
There are certain pre-requisite conditions, given
under sections 84-92, which need to be fulfilled if
a compulsory license is to be granted in favour
of someone.
Section 84 provides that at any time after the
expiration of three years from the date of the
grant of a patent, any person interested may
make an application to the Controller for grant of
compulsory licence on patent on any of the
following grounds, namely:
a) that the reasonable requirements of the public
with respect to the patented invention have not
been satisfied, or
b) that the patented invention is not available to
the public at a reasonably affordable price, or
c) that the patented invention is not worked in the
territory of India.
An application for compulsory licence may be
made by any person notwithstanding that he is
already the holder of a licence under the patent
and no person shall be estopped from alleging
that the reasonable requirements of the public
with respect to the patented invention are not
satisfied or that the patented invention is not
worked in the territory of India or that the
patented invention is not available to the public
at a reasonably affordable price by reason of any
admission made by him, whether in such a
licence or otherwise or by reason of his having
accepted such a licence.
Sub-section (3) requires every application for
compulsory licence to contain a statement
setting out the nature of the applicant's interest
together with such particulars as may be
prescribed and the facts upon which the
application is based. The Controller on being
satisfied that the reasonable requirements of the
public with respect to the patented invention
have not been satisfied or the patented invention
is not worked in the territory of India or the
patented invention is not available to the public
at a reasonably affordable price, may grant a
licence upon such terms as he may deem fit.
In considering the application of compulsory
licence, the Controller is required to take into
account -
(i) the nature of the invention, the time which has
elapsed since the sealing of the patent and the
measures already taken by the patentee or any
licencee to make full use of the invention;
(ii) the ability of the applicant to work the
invention to the public advantage;
(iii) the capacity of the applicant to undertake the
risk in providing capital and working the
invention, if the application were granted;
(iv) as to whether the applicant has made efforts
to obtain a licence from the patentee on
reasonable terms and conditions and such
efforts have not been successful within a
reasonable period as the Controller may deem
fit.

It may be noted that above stated point (i) to (iv)
shall not be applicable in case of national
emergency or other circumstances of extreme
urgency or in case of public non-commercial use
or on establishment of a ground of anti-
competitive practices adopted by the patentee.
However, the Controller is under no obligation to
take into account matters subsequent to the
making of the application. It has been clarified
that the reasonable period shall be construed as
a period not ordinarily exceeding a period of six
months. In this context, it has been clarified that,
the reasonable requirements of the public shall
be deemed not to have been satisfied if -
(a) by reason of the refusal of the patentee to
grant a licence or licences on reasonable terms,-
(i) an existing trade or industry or the
development thereof or the establishment of any
new trade or industry in India or the trade or
industry in India or the trade or industry of any
person or class of persons trading or
manufacturing in India is prejudiced; or
(ii) the demand for the patented article has not
been met to an adequate extent or on
reasonable terms; or
(iii) a market for export of the patented article
manufactured in India is not being supplied or
developed; or
(iv) the establishment or development of
commercial activities in India is prejudiced; or
(b) by reason of conditions imposed by the
patentee upon the grant of licences under the
patent or upon the purchase, hire or use of the
patented article or process, the manufacture, use
or sale of materials not protected by the patent,
or the establishment or development of any trade
or industry in India, is prejudiced; or
(c) the patentee imposes a condition upon the
grant of licences under the patent to provide
exclusive grant back, prevention to challenges to
the validity of patent or coercive package
licensing; or
(d) the patented invention is not being worked in
the territory of India on a commercial scale to an
adequate extent or is not being so worked to the
fullest extent that is reasonably practicable; or
(e) the working of the patented invention in the
territory of India on a commercial scale is being
prevented or hindered by the importation from
abroad of the patented article by -
(i) the patentee or persons claiming under him; or
(ii) persons directly or indirectly purchasing from
him; or
(iii) other persons against whom the patentee is
not taking or has not taken proceedings for
infringement.
Revocation of Patents by the Controller for Non-
Working
Section 85 deals with revocation of patents by
Controller for non-working and provides that
where, in respect of a patent, a compulsory
licence has been granted, the Central
Government or any person interested may, after
the expiration of two years from the date of the
order granting the first compulsory licence, apply
to the Controller for an order revoking the patent
on the ground that the patented invention has
not been worked in the territory of India or
reasonable requirements of the public with
respect to the patented invention has not been
satisfied or the patented invention is not
available to the public at a reasonably affordable
price.
Every application for revocation should contain
prescribed particulars, the facts upon which the
application is based, and, in the case of an
application other than by the Central
Government, should also set out the nature of
the applicant's interest. The Controller, if
satisfied that the reasonable requirements of the
public with respect to the patented invention has
not been satisfied or patented invention has not
been worked in the territory of India or is not
available to the public at a reasonably affordable
price, may make an order revoking the patent.
The controller has however been put under
obligation to ordinarily decide such application
within one year of its presentation.

Procedure for Dealing with Applications
Section 87 provides that where the Controller is
satisfied, upon consideration of an application for
compulsory licence or revocation of patent, that
a prima facie case has been made out for the
making of an order, he shall direct the applicant
to serve copies of the application upon the
patentee and any other person appearing from
the register to be interested in the patent in
respect of which the application is made, and
shall publish the application in the Official
Journal.
The patentee or any other person desiring to
oppose the application may, within prescribed
time or within such further time as the Controller
may on application allow, give to the Controller
notice of opposition. Any such notice of
opposition should contain a statement setting out
the grounds on which the application is opposed.
Where any such notice of opposition is duly
given, the Controller shall notify the applicant,
and shall give to the applicant and the opponent
an opportunity to be heard before deciding the
case.
Powers of Controller in granting compulsory
licences
Section 88 provides that where the Controller is
satisfied that the manufacture, use or sale of
materials not protected by the patent is
prejudiced by reason of conditions imposed by
the patentee upon the grant of licences under the
patent, or upon the purchase, hire or use of the
patented article or process, he may order the
grant of licences under the patent to such
customers of the applicant as he thinks fit as well
as to the applicant. Where an application for
compulsory licence is made under Section 84 by
a person being the holder of a licence under the
patent, the Controller may, if he makes an order
for the grant of a licence to the applicant, order
the existing licence to be cancelled, or may, if he
thinks fit, instead of making an order for the grant
of a licence to the applicant, order the existing
licence to be amended.
Where two or more patents are held by the same
patentee and an applicant for a compulsory
licence establishes that the reasonable
requirements of the public have not been
satisfied with respect to only some of the said
patents, then, if the Controller is satisfied that the
applicant cannot efficiently or satisfactorily work
the licence granted to him under those patents
without infringing the other patents held by the
patentee and if those patents involve important
technical advancement or considerable
economic significance in relation to the other
patents, he may, by order, direct the grant of a
licence in respect of the other patents also to
enable the licencee to work the patent or patents
in regard to which a licence is granted under
Section 84.
Where the terms and conditions of a licence
have been settled by the Controller, the licencee
may, at any time after he has worked the
invention on a commercial scale for a period of
not less than twelve months, make an
application to the Controller for the revision of
the terms and conditions on the ground that the
terms and conditions settled have proved to be
more onerous than originally expected and that
in consequence thereof the licencee is unable to
work the invention except at a loss. However no
such application shall be entertained a second
time by the Controller.
Termination of compulsory licence
Section 94 provides that on an application made
by the patentee or any other person deriving title
or interest in the patent, a compulsory licence
may be terminated by the Controller, provided
the circumstances that give rise to the grant
thereof no longer exist and such circumstances
are unlikely to recur. In this regard the holder of
the compulsory licence has been entitled to
object to such termination.
International Arrangements
Section 133 to 139 deal with international
arrangements. Section 133 deals with
convention countries; section 134 deals with
notification as to countries not providing for
reciprocity; section 135 provides for convention
applications; section 136 contains special
provisions relating to convention applications;
section 137 provides for multiple priorities;
section 138 deals with supplementary provisions
as to convention applications; and section 139
provides for application of other provisions of the
Act to convention applications.
In terms of Section 133 a convention country is
that country, which is a signatory or party or a
group of countries, union of countries or
intergovernmental organizations which are
signatories or parties to an international, regional
or bi-lateral treaty, convention or arrangement to
which India is also a signatory or party and which
affords to the applicants for patents in India or to
citizens of India similar privileges as are granted
to their own citizens or citizens to their member
countries in respect of the grant of patents and
protection of patent rights. Section 134 provides
that where any country notified by the Central
Government as Convention Country does not
accord to citizens of India the same rights in
respect of the grant of patents and the protection
of patent rights as it accords to its own nationals,
no national of such country shall be entitled
either solely or jointly with any other person:
a) to apply for the grant of a patent or be
registered as the proprietor of a patent;
b) to be registered as the assignee of the
proprietor of a patent; or
c) to apply for a licence or hold any licence under
a patent granted under the Act.
Section 135(1) provides that where a person has
made an application for a patent in respect of an
invention in a convention country (basic
application) and that person or legal
representative or assignee of that person makes
an application under the Act for a patent within
twelve months after the date on which the basic
application was made, the priority date of a claim
of the complete specification being a claim
based on matter disclosed in the basic
application, is the date of making of the basic
application.
The explanation to Section 135(1) clarifies that
where applications have been made for similar
protection in respect of an invention in two or
more convention countries, the period of twelve
months shall be reckoned from the date on
which the earlier or earliest of the said
applications was made.
In case of an application filed under the Patent
Cooperation Treaty designating India and
claiming priority from a previously filed
application in India, the provisions of sub-
sections (1) and (2) shall apply as if the
previously filed application were the basic
application. However, a request for examination
under section 11B shall be made only for one of
the applications filed in India.
Section 136 containing special provisions
relating to convention applications requires every
convention application to be accompanied by a
complete specification; and specify the date on
which and the convention country in which the
application for protection, or as the case may be,
the first of such application was made; and to
state that no application for protection in respect
of the invention had been made in a convention
country before that date by the applicant or by
any person from whom he derives title.
A complete specification filed with a convention
application may include claims in respect of
developments of, or additions to, the invention in
respect of which the application for protection
was made in a convention country, being
developments or additions in respect of which
the applicant would be entitled under the
provisions of Section 6 to make a separate
application for a patent. Sub-section (3) prohibits
a convention application to be post-dated to a
date later than the date on which the application
could have been made under the Act.
Section 138 requires the applicant of a
convention application to furnish, in addition to
the complete specification, copies of the
specifications or corresponding documents filed
or deposited by the applicant in the patent office
of the convention country and verified to the
satisfaction of the Controller within the
prescribed period from the date of
communication by the Controller. If any such
specification or other document is in a foreign
language, a translation into english of the
specification or document verified by affidavit or
otherwise to the satisfaction of the Controller are
required to be furnished.
Patent Agent
The work relating to drafting of specifications,
making of application for a patent, subsequent
correspondence with the Patent office on the
objections raised, representing the applicant's
case at the hearings, filing opposition and
defending application against opposition is
entrusted to a qualified Patent Agent. Sections
125-132 of the Patents Act, 1970 read with the
Patents Rules deal with the Patent Agents.
Patent Office and Its Establishment
The Controller General of Patents, Designs and
Trade Marks appointed under Section 3(1) of the
Trade Marks Act, 1999 shall be the Controller of
Patents for the purposes of this Act.
For the purposes of Patents Act, there shall be
an office which shall be known as the patent
office. The Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify the
name of the Patent Office.
Appeals to High Court
Section 117A(1) states that save as otherwise
expressly provided in sub-section (2), no appeal
shall lie from any decision, order or direction
made or issued under this Act by the Central
Government, or from any act or order of the
Controller for the purpose of giving effect to any
such decision, order or direction.
According to Section 117A (2) an appeal shall lie
to the High Court from any decision, order or
direction of the Controller of Central Government
under section 15, section 16, section 17, section
18, section 19, section 20, subsection (4) of
section 25, section 28, section 51, section 54,
section 57, section 60, section 61, section 63,
section 66, sub-section (3) of section 69, section
78, sub-sections (1) to (5) of section 84, section
85, section 88, section 91, section 92 and
section 94.

Every appeal under this section shall be in the
prescribed form and shall be verified in such
manner as may be prescribed and shall be
accompanied by a copy of the decision, order or
direction appealed against and by such fees as
may be prescribed.

LESSON ROUND-UP
* A Patent is a statutory right for an invention
granted for a limited period of time to the
patentee by the Government, in exchange of full
disclosure of his invention for excluding others,
from making, using, selling, importing the
patented product or process for producing that
product for those purposes without his consent.
* The law relating to patents contained in the
Patents Act, 1970 has been amended in the year
1995, 1999, 2002 and 2005 to meet India's
obligations under the agreement on Trade
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPs) forming part of the Agreement
establishing the World Trade Organisation
(WTO).
* Invention as to mean a new product or process
involving an inventive step and capable of
Industrial application.
* Inventive step as to mean a feature of an
invention that involves technical advance as
compared to the existing knowledge or having
economic significance or both that makes the
invention not obvious to a person skilled in the
art.
* Provisional specification describes the nature
of the invention to have the priority date of filing
of the application in which the inventive idea has
been disclosed. It must be followed by a
complete specification describing the details of
the invention along with a statement of claims
within 12 months after filing of the provisional
application. If the complete specification is not
filed within the prescribed period, the application
is treated as deemed to have been abandoned.
* Generally, an application filed with provisional
specification is known as provisional application
which is useful in establishing a priority date for
your invention. Moreover, filing of a provisional
application is useful as it gives sufficient time to
the applicant to assess and evaluate the market
potential of his invention before filing complete
specification. However, it is not necessary to file
an application with provisional specification and
one can file application directly with complete
specification.
                                                   ? Patents Act
                                                   deals with
                                                   opposition to
                                                   grant of
                                                   patent and
                                                   provides that
                                                   where an
                                                   application for
                                                   a patent has
                                                   been
                                                   published but
                                                   a patent has
                                                   not been
                                                   granted, any
                                                   person may,
                                                   in writing,
* Application for a patent for an invention may be represent by
made (a) by any person claiming to be the true way of
and first inventor of the invention;(b) by any     opposition to
person being the assignee of the person            the Controller
claiming to be the true and first inventor in      against the
respect of the right to make such an application; grant of
(c)by the legal representative of any deceased patent on the
person who immediately before his death was certain
entitled to make such an application.              grounds.
* The work relating to drafting of specifications,
making of application for a patent, subsequent
correspondence with the Patent office on the
objections raised, representing the applicant's
case at the hearings, filing opposition and
defending application against opposition is
entrusted to a qualified Patent Agent.
TEST YOURSELF
(These are meant for re-capitulation only.
Answers to these questions are not to be
submitted for evaluation)
1. What is the term of a patent in the Indian
system?
2. What are the criteria of patentability?
3. What types of inventions are not patentable in
India?
4. Who can apply for a patent?
5. What are the rights of a patentee once the
patent is granted?

LIST OF FURTHER READINgS
? Bare Act - Patents Act, 1970 and rules made
thereunder. ? Indian Patent Law and Practice -
Oxford Publishers ? Intellectual Property Laws
and Practice - Elizabeth Verkey
OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDINg
WEbSITES / vIDEO LINKS)
? https://ipindia.gov.in/patents.htm
REgULATORY FRAMEWORK
                                                    Trade Marks Trade Marks
?                                                   Act, 1999 ? Rules, 2017
Trade Marks Act, 1999 is an Act to amend and
consolidate the law relating to trade marks, to
provide for registration and better protection of
trade marks for goods and services and for the
prevention of the use of fraudulent marks. It
extends to the whole of India.

INTRODUCTION
A trademark is a sign capable of distinguishing
the goods or services of one enterprise from
those of other enterprises. Trademarks are
protected by intellectual property rights. A trade
mark is a visual symbol which may be a word
signature, name, device, label, numerals or
combination of colours used by one undertaking
on goods or services or other articles of
commerce to distinguish it from other similar
goods or services originating from a different
undertaking. Trademark is a symbol that allows a
purchaser to identify goods or services that have
been proved satisfactory and not to buy goods or
services that have not been satisfactory.
Trademarks help promote economic efficiency. If
trademarks are not allowed to be registered with
the manufacturers it may eventually take away
the incentive of trademark owning manufacturers
to make investments in quality control. There
would thus be no healthy competition among the
manufacturers leading to the loss of vitality of
the economy. If we do not have a system of
having trademark a manufacturer would get
nothing by improving his product's quality. And
consumers would not be in a position to identify
high or low-quality products. In such a situation a
manufacturer who reduce the price by reducing
quality may pocket the benefit of the market. The
consequence would be attempts to produce
inferior quality products rather than competition
to produce better-quality products.
In view of developments in trading and
commercial practices, increasing globalisation of
trade and industry, the need to encourage
investment flows and transfer of technology,
need for simplification and harmonization of
trade mark management systems and to give
effect to important judicial decisions, a new
Trade Marks Act, 1999 have been enacted to
provide for registration of trade mark for goods
as well as services including prohibition to the
registration of imitation of well-known
trademarks, and expansion of grounds for
refusal of registration.
A Trade Mark distinguishes the goods of one
manufacturer or trader from similar goods of
others and therefore, it seeks to protect the
interest of the consumer as well as the trader. A
trade mark may consist of a device depicting the
picture of animals, human beings etc., words,
letters, numerals, signatures or any combination
thereof. Since a trade mark indicates relationship
in the course of trade, between trader and
goods, it serves as a useful medium of
advertisement for the goods and their quality.
The current law of Trade Marks contained in the
Trade Marks Act, 1999 is in harmony with two
major international treaties on the subject,
namely The Paris Convention for Protection of
Industrial Property and TRIPS Agreement to
both of which India is a signatory.


DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
Following are some of the important terms
defined in the Trade Marks Act
Trade Mark
The term trade mark has been defined under
Section 2(1)(zb) of the Act as to mean a mark
capable of being represented graphically and
which is capable of distinguishing the goods or
services of one person from those of others and
may include shape of goods, their packaging and
combination of colours; and
(i) in relation to Chapter XII (other than section
107), a registered trade mark or a mark used in
relation to goods or services for the purpose of
indicating or so as to indicate a connection in the
course of trade between the goods or services,
as the case may be, and some person having
the right as proprietor to use the mark; and
(ii) in relation to other provisions of this Act, a
mark used or proposed to be used in relation to
goods or services for the purpose of indicating or
so to indicate a connection in the course of trade
between the goods or services, as the case may
be, and some person having the right, either as
proprietor or by way of permitted user, to use the
mark whether with or without any indication of
the identity of that person, and includes a
certification trade mark or collective mark.
What is a Trademark?
A trademark (popularly known as brand name) in
layman's language is a visual symbol which may
be a word signature, name, device, label,
numerals or combination of colours used by one
undertaking on goods or services or other
articles of commerce to distinguish it from other
similar goods or services originating from a
different undertaking.
The essential requirements to register a
trademark under the Act are:

Section 2(1)(e) defines the term certification
trade mark as to mean a mark capable of
distinguishing the goods or services in
connection with which it is used in the course of
trade which are certified by the proprietor of the
mark in respect of origin, material, mode of
manufacture of goods or performance of
services, quality, accuracy or other
characteristics from goods or services not so
certified and registerable as such in respect of
those goods or services in the name, as
proprietor of the certification trade mark, of that
person.
Collective Mark
As per Section 2(1)(g) of the Act, Collective mark
means a trade mark distinguishing the goods or
services of members of an association of
persons (not being a partnership within the
meaning of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932
which is the proprietor of the mark from those of
others.
Well Known Trade Mark
In terms of Section 2(1)(zg), a well-known trade
mark in relation to any goods or services means
a mark which has become so to the substantial
segment of the public which uses such goods or
services such that the use of such mark in
relation to other goods or services would be
likely to be taken as indicating a connection in
the course of trade or rendering of services
between those goods or services and a person
using the mark in relation to the first-mentioned
goods or services.
With coming up of the Trade Mark Rules 2017, a
new procedure has been created that allows the
Registrar to proclaim a particular trademark as
"well known". According to the new rule, a
trademark owner can file an application in form
TM-M with a request made to the Registrar for
declaring the mark to be "well-known". A well-
known trade mark has been vouchsafed with
extraordinary protection and safeguards against
passing off and infringement of such trademarks.
Well-known trademarks are recognised in India
on the basis of their reputation, nationally,
internationally and the cross-borders. Unlike
other trademarks whose goodwill and reputation
is limited to a certain specified geographical area
and to a certain range of products, well-known
trademarks have its goodwill and reputation
protected across the nation and across
categories of goods and services. It is law that
restricts the Trade Mark Registry to allow and
register any mark as a trademark which is
deceptively similar to any of the well-known
trademark.
For Example: Google has been registered as a
well-known trademark of Alphabet Inc., which
thereby means only Alphabet Inc. can register
the term 'Google' for any category of goods and
services. Even if the service is not related to the
Internet industry, no other company but Alphabet
Inc. can register 'Google' as its trademark.
Mark
The term mark under Section 2(1)(m) has been
defined to include a device, brand, heading,
label, ticket, name, signature, word, letter,
numeral, shape of goods, packaging or
combination of colours or any combination
thereof.
Assignment
According to Section 2(1)(b) of the Act,
assignment means an assignment in writing by
act of the parties concerned.
Deceptively Similar
According to Section 2(1) (h) of the Act a mark
shall be deemed to be deceptively similar to
another mark if it so nearly resembles that other
mark as to be likely to deceive or cause
confusion.
Package
In terms of clause (q) of Section 2(1) the term
package include any case, box, container,
covering, folder, receptacle, vessel, casket,
bottle, wrapper, label, band, ticket, reel, frame,
capsule, cap, lid, stopper and cork.
Permitted Use
mark                                                (i)




Section 2(1)(r) defines the term permitted use, in
relation to a registered trade mark, as to mean
the use of trade
by a registered user of the trade mark in relation
to goods or services -
a) with which he is connected in the course of
trade; and
b) in respect of which the trade mark remains
registered for the time being; and
c) for which he is registered as registered user;
and
d) which complies with any conditions or
limitations to which the registration of registered
user is subject; or
                                                      (ii)
by a person other than the registered proprietor
and registered user in relation to goods or
services
a) with which he is connected in the course of
trade; and
b) in respect of which the trade mark remains
registered for the time being; and
c) by consent of such registered proprietor in a
written agreement; and
d) which complies with any conditions or
limitations to which such user is subject and to
which the registration of the trade mark is
subject.
Service
The term service under clause (z) of sub-section
(1) of Section (2) has been defined as to mean
service of any description which is made
available to potential users and includes the
provision of services in connection with business
of any industrial or commercial matters such as
banking, communication, education, financing,
insurance, chit funds, real estate, transport,
storage, material treatment, processing, supply
of electrical or other energy, boarding, lodging,
entertainment, amusement, construction, repair,
conveying of news or information and
advertising.
Who can Apply for a Trademark and How?
Any person, claiming to be the proprietor of a
trademark used or proposed to be used by him,
may apply in writing in prescribed manner for
registration. The application should contain the
trademark, the goods/ services, name and
address of applicant and agent (if any) with
power of attorney, the period of use of the mark.
The applications can be submitted personally at
the Front Office Counter of the respective office
or can be sent by post. These can also be filed
on line through the e-filing gateway available at
the official website.
What are different types of Trademarks that may
be Registered in India?
? Any name (including personal or surname of
the applicant or predecessor in business or the
signature of the person), which is not unusual for
trade to adopt as a mark.
? An invented word or any arbitrary dictionary
word or words, not being directly descriptive of
the character or quality of the goods/service.
? Letters or numerals or any combination
thereof.
? The right to proprietorship of a trademark may
be acquired by either registration under the Act
or by use in relation to particular goods or
service.
? Devices, including fancy devices or symbols.
? Monograms.
? Combination of colors or even a single color in
combination with a word or device.
? Shape of goods or their packaging.
? Marks constituting a three dimensional sign.
? Sound marks when represented in
conventional notation or described in words by
being graphically represented.
Procedure for Registration
Section 18 deals with the procedure for making
an application for registration. Any person
claiming to be the Proprietor of a trademark
used or proposed to be used by him, who is
desirous of registering it, shall apply in writing to
the Registrar in the prescribed manner for the
registration of his trademark. Sub-section (2) of
Section 18 allows registration in several classes
of goods or services by means of a single
application. However, the fee payable is to be
calculated on the basis of the number of classes
in which registration is sought.

Section 23 places obligation on the Registrar to
register the trade mark where the procedure for
registration of a trade mark has been completed
viz., the application has been accepted and
either the application has not been opposed or
the opposition has been dismissed.
Processing of TM Application in Trade Mark
Registry
At present processing of Trade Mark application
is done completely through TM electronic
processing System and filing of application is
allowed in hybrid mode, i.e. online as well as
offline. Currently online filing has reached around
98%. Moreover, all applications received offline
get digitized at its initial stage and movement of
the file is done through complete electronic
mode thereafter.
A brief description of stage wise processing in
Trade Mark Registration is as follows - A. Pre-
Examination Processing:
i. Filing of application: A Trade Mark Application
may be filed online or offline. After digitization of
offline applications, both online and offline
applications are merged and proceed further for
processing through the Trade Mark system.
ii. VIENNA Codification: If applied mark consists
of figurative elements, codification of the
figurative elements is done as per VIENNA
Agreement and then application moves for
examination. Trade Marks applied as word per
se directly proceed for examination. It is
expected that all applications which may require
VIENNA Codification or otherwise should be
processed expeditiously and serially as per
priority based on the date of filing of application.
b. Examination of Applications:
It may be noted that allotment of applications for
the examination is done by the automated
system serially on the basis of the date of filing.
Examination in Trade Mark Registration is done
in two stages, first examination report is
prepared by an Examiner and then the
application and examination report is forwarded
to Examination Controller for approval.
Examination Controller evaluates the
examination report, and if found proper,
approves it and thereafter the examination report
is issued to applicant. However, if some
deficiency is noted by the Controller, the
examination report is reverted/referred back to
the concerned Examiner with suggestions for
resubmission/re-examination.
At this stage, application may be accepted or an
objection may be raised as per provisions of the
Trade Mark Act. In case it is accepted, it will be
published in Trade Mark Journal, else
examination report will be issued to the applicant
containing office objections which needs to be
replied by the applicant within 30 days from the
date of receipt of examination report.
It is expected that examination should be done
expeditiously and serially as per priority based
on the date of filing of application or if any
compliances are required, expeditiously and
serially as per priority based the date of last
compliance, if any.
C. Post Examination Processing:
i. Consideration of Reply: After receipt of
examination report, applicant needs to submit his
reply to the office objections within one month
time and if he fails to do so, the application is
abandoned for want of reply.
If reply is submitted within the prescribed period,
the same is considered by the authorized officers
for the purpose. Here also, the application is
allotted to the authorized officers through the
Trade Mark system serially on the basis of the
date of filing of the response to the examination
report. At this stage, the authorized officer may
accept application and the same is to be
published in the Trade Mark Journal. In other
cases, where the office objections cannot be
waived or found not met, a hearing opportunity is
offered to the applicants in all those cases where
a decision can adversely affect the interest of the
applicant, a hearing opportunity is given as per
law.
                                                      It is expected that
                                                      if reply is
                                                      submitted against
                                                      the office
                                                      objections, the
                                                      same should be
                                                      considered by the
                                                      authorized officers
                                                      expeditiously and
                                                      serially as per
                                                      priority based the
                                                      date of filing of
                                                      response to the
                                                      examination
                                                      report.
ii. Show-cause hearing: In case the objection/s
raised by the office are not met after
consideration of reply to the examination report,
the application moves for show cause hearing. In
show cause hearing, the hearing notices are
issued serially to the applicant/ agent through
the system and allotment of the cases to the
Hearing officers is also done by the TM system
automatically.
The scheduling of applications for hearing
should also be done serially based on the date
of consideration of reply by the authorized
officer.
D. Post Advertisement Processing:
After the acceptance of the mark, trademark is
published in Trade Mark Journal. If no opposition
is filed within four months from the date of
publication of the trademark, the published
trademark becomes eligible for registration.
The issuance of registration certificate is done
through automated Trade Mark system. The
certificate gets automatically issued if no
opposition is filed within the prescribed period or
where the application has not already been
withdrawn by the Registrar of Trade Marks at the
request of the applicant.
The Trade Mark once registered is valid for 10
years. The same can be renewed after every 10
years for an indefinite period by paying the
prescribed fee on the prescribed form. E.
Opposition:
If the trademark is opposed by any third party
after the publication, the same needs to be
disposed of as per rules after giving proper
hearing opportunity to both the parties. If the
opposition is dismissed, the trade mark proceeds
for registration and registration certificate is
issued to the applicant. In case opposition is
allowed, the application gets refused as per law.
It is expected that if any application is opposed,
the same should be disposed serially based on
the compliance or non-compliance by the party
(i.e. Applicant or Opponent) as per provisions of
the Trade Marks Act and Rules.
Procedure for disposal of the Rectification
proceedings shall be similar to the opposition
procedure subject to the provisions of the Trade
Marks Act and Rules.
F. Post Registration Trade Mark Management
It is possible for the registered proprietor to
record the post registration changes pertaining to
proprietor name, address, address for service,
assignment or registered user, etc. in the
Register of Trade Marks by filing a request on
the prescribed form, with the prescribed fee. In
case the concerned officer examining the
request raises some objections and requires
some compliance on part of the applicant, the
same should be processed ordinarily within 30
days from the date of compliance by the
applicant. It is also a practice of Registry to send
one month notice to previous registered
proprietor in case any change in proprietorship
by way of assignment or transmission is filed by
the applicant. In this case, the request can be
processed only after expiry of one month notice
period as mentioned above.
It is expected that the post registration request
shall be examined and processed serially based
on the date of filing of the request and date of
compliance of the requirements, if any.
The renewal requests received by the Registry
are processed through an automated TM system
serially based on the date of filing of the request.
Trade Mark Registration Workflow Chart

What are the Benefits of Registering a
Trademark?
The registration of a trademark confers upon the
owner the exclusive right to the use the
trademark in relation to the goods or services in
respect of which the mark is registered and to
indicate so by using the symbol (R), and seek
the relief of infringement in appropriate courts in
the country. The exclusive right is however
subject to any conditions entered on the register
such as limitation of area of use etc. Also, where
two or more persons have registered identical or
nearly similar marks due to special
circumstances, such exclusive right does not
operate against each other.
Absolute grounds for Refusal of Registration
Section 9(1) of the Act containing provisions
relating to absolute grounds for refusal for
registration prohibit the registration of those
trademarks
(a) which are devoid of any distinctive character,
that is to say, not capable of distinguishing the
goods or services of one person from those of
another person;
(b) which consist exclusively of marks or
indications which may serve in trade to
designate the kind,
quality, quantity, intended purpose, values,
geographical origin or the time of production of
the goods or rendering of the service or other
characteristics of the goods or service;
(c) which consist exclusively of marks or
indications which have become customary in the
current language or in the bona fide and
established practices of the trade, shall not be
registered: Provided that a trade mark shall not
be refused registration if before the date of
application for registration it has acquired a
distinctive character as a result of the use made
of it or is a well-known trade mark.
In the case of Himalaya Drug Company vs.
S.B.L. Ltd. 2013 (53) PTC 1 (Del.) (DB): the
Appellant had filed a suit against the Respondent
for infringement of trade mark "Liv.52" by use of
the trade mark "Liv-T". The lower court
dismissed the suit of the Appellants holding that
the mark 'LIV' is publici juris and there is no
similarity between the two trademarks. 'Liv' will
be considered as the generic on account of the
fact that it is used in respect of medicine used
for treatment of ailment of 'Liver' and non-
distinctive part of the mark and it is to be ignored
even if the two rival marks are to be taken as a
whole.
The Plaintiffs filed an appeal before the High
Court of Delhi, whereby the High Court reversed
the finding of the lower court and upheld the
principles of Trade Mark law of comparison and
infringement. The court held that the onus of
proving that the term 'LIV' has become generic
lied heavily on the Defendant, more so in the
light of the fact that the Trade Mark of the
Plaintiff had voluminous sales, was being used
since the year 1955 and was registered since the
year 1957 and as seven years had expired from
the date of the registration, the Registration of
the trade mark the trade mark was taken to be
valid as per Section 32 of the erstwhile Trade
Marks Act, 1958.

The Defendant could not prove by way of its
evidence that the word 'LIV' is generic. The
Plaintiff on the other hand proved the
distinctiveness of its mark by way of its evidence
by providing the orders where the mark 'LIV.52'
has been granted protection. The court also
noted that consumer asked for Plaintiff's product
as Liv.52 thus 'LIV' was the essential and
prominent feature of the mark 'LIV.52' and
restrained the Defendant from using the mark
'LIV-T' and the Court allowed the Defendant to
amend its mark accordingly to a mark which will
not be similar to the mark of the Plaintiff.
However, a trademark shall not be refused
registration, if the mark has in fact acquired a
distinctive character as a result of use or is a
well-known trade mark before the date of
application. In short, a trade mark which has
been demonstrated to be distinctive in the
market place shall be regarded as distinctive in
law as well and be registerable.
According to Section 9(2) the following
trademark shall not be registered:
1. If the trademark tends to deceive the public or
cause any confusion;
2. In any instance if the trademark hurts any
religious sentiment of any demographic section
of Indian citizens;
In the case of Amritpal Singh vs. Lal Babu
Priyadarshi , 2005 (30) PTC 94, Intellectual
Property Appellate Board (IPAB) the word
RAMAYAN was refused registration on the
grounds that: Firstly, it was not capable of
distinguishing the goods of the applicant and
Secondly, that it was likely to hurt religious
sentiments of a class of society.
Further, Intellectual Property Appellate Board
referred the case Registrar of Trade Marks v.
Ashok Chandra Rakhit Ltd., AIR 1955 SC 555
where in the Hon'ble Supreme Court in his order
inter alia observed:
(4) It appears that subsequently the Registrar
found that the word Shree" was used by Hindus
as an auspicious symbol and placed even on
letter heads and that consequently it was not
adapted to distinguish within the meaning of the
Act. In course of time, therefore, a practice
became established in the Registry whereby the
word "Shree" was either refused registration as a
trade mark or a disclaimer was enforced if it
were made a part of a trade mark. So inflexible
had been this practice that barring this particular
trade mark No. 3815 there was no other trade
mark containing the word "Shree" which had
been registered without a disclaimer of the word
"Shree". Naturally this circumstance was bound
to be regarded as an invidious discrimination
and, indeed, pointed reference is said to have
been made to it and it was suggested that the
Registry should deal impartially and uniformly
with all applications in matters relating to
practice."
3. It comprises or contains scandalous or
obscene matter;
4. Its use is prohibited under the Emblems and
Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950.
Section 9(3) prohibits registration of a mark, if it
consists exclusively of shape of goods which
result from the nature of the goods themselves
or which is necessary to obtain a technical result
or which gives substantial value to the goods. It
is, however, explained that the nature of goods
or services in relation to which the Trade Mark is
used or proposed to be used shall not be a
ground for refusal of registration.
Limitation as to Colour
Section 10 provides that a trade mark may be
limited wholly or in part to any combination of
colours and any such limitation shall be taken
into consideration by the Registrar or the High
Court, as the case may be having to decide on
the distinctive character of the trade mark.
So far as a trade mark is registered without
limitation of colour, it shall be deemed to be
registered for all colours.
Relative grounds for Refusal of Registration
Section 11(1) stipulates that a trade mark shall
not be registered if, because of-
(a) its identity with an earlier trade mark and
similarity of goods or services covered by the
trade mark; or
(b) its similarity to an earlier trade mark and the
identity or similarity of the goods or services
covered by the trade mark, there exists a
likelihood of confusion on the part of the public,
which includes the likelihood of association with
the earlier trade mark.
Section 11 (2) states that a trade mark which (a)
is identical with or similar to an earlier trade
mark; and (b) is to be registered for goods or
services which are not similar to those for which
the earlier trade mark is registered in the name
of a different proprietor, shall not be registered if
or to the extent the earlier trade mark is a
wellknown trade mark in India and the use of the
later mark without due cause would take unfair
advantage of or be detrimental to the distinctive
character or repute of the earlier trade mark.
Section 11 (3) provides that a trade mark shall
not be registered if, or to the extent that, its use
in India is liable to be prevented-
(a) by virtue of any law in particular the law of
passing off protecting an unregistered trade
mark used in the course of trade; or
(b) by virtue of law of copyright.
Section 11(4) states that nnothing in this section
shall prevent the registration of a trade mark
where the proprietor of the earlier trade mark or
other earlier right consents to the registration,
and in such case the Registrar may register the
mark under special circumstances under section
12.
Earlier Trade Mark means-
(a) a registered trade mark or an application
under section 18 bearing an earlier date of filing
or an international registration referred to in
section 36E or convention application referred to
in section 154 which has a date of application
earlier than that of the trade mark in question,
taking account, where appropriate, of the
priorities claimed in respect of the trade marks.
(b) a trade mark which, on the date of the
application for registration of the trade mark in
question, or where appropriate, of the priority
claimed in respect of the application, was
entitled to protection as a well-known trade mark.
As per Section 11 (6) of the Act, the Registrar
shall, while determining whether a trade mark is
a well-known trade mark, take into account any
fact which he considers relevant for determining
a trade mark as a well-known trade mark
including-
(i) the knowledge or recognition of that trade
mark in the relevant section of the public
including knowledge in India obtained as a result
of promotion of the trade mark;
(ii) the duration, extent and geographical area of
any use of that trade mark;
(iii) the duration, extent and geographical area of
any promotion of the trade mark, including
advertising or publicity and presentation, at fairs
or exhibition of the goods or services to which
the trade mark applies;
(iv) the duration and geographical area of any
registration of or any application for registration
of that trade mark under this Act to the extent
that they reflect the use or recognition of the
trade mark;
(v) the record of successful enforcement of the
rights in that trade mark, in particular the extent
to which the trade mark has been recognised as
a well-known trade mark by any court or
Registrar under that record.
Section 11(7) provides that the Registrar shall,
while determining as to whether a trade mark is
known or recognised in a relevant section of the
public for the purposes of sub-section (6), take
into account-
(i) the number of actual or potential consumers
of the goods or services;
(ii) the number of persons involved in the
channels of distribution of the goods or services;
(iii) the business circles dealing with the goods or
services; to which that trade mark applies.
Where a trade mark has been determined to be
well known in at least one relevant section of the
public in India by any court or Registrar, the
Registrar shall consider that trade mark as a
well-known trade mark for registration under this
Act.
The Registrar shall not require as a condition, for
determining whether a trade mark is a well-
known trade mark, any of the following, namely:-
(i) that the trade mark has been used in India;
(ii) that the trade mark has been registered;
(iii) that the application for registration of the
trade mark has been filed in India;
(iv) that the trade mark-
(a) is well-known in; or
(b) has been registered in; or
(c) in respect of which an application for
registration has been filed in, any jurisdiction
other than India, or
(v) that the trade mark is well-known to the public
at large in India.
While considering an application for registration
of a trade mark and opposition filed in respect
thereof, the Registrar shall-
(i) protect a well-known trade mark against the
identical or similar trademarks;
(ii) take into consideration the bad faith involved
either of the applicant or the opponent affecting
the right relating to the trade mark.
Where a trade mark has been registered in good
faith disclosing the material information to the
Registrar or where right to a trade mark has been
acquired through use in good faith before the
commencement of this Act, then, nothing in this
Act shall prejudice the validity of the registration
of that trade mark or right to use that trade mark
on the ground that such trade mark is identical
with or similar to a well-known trade mark.
In the case of Imperial Tobacco Co. of India Ltd.
vs. The Registrar of Trade Marks Calcutta High
Court judgement dated 28 May, 1968, the
Imperial Tobacco Company manufactured and
distributed cigarettes with a label "simla" all over
the country. ITC ltd. made an application to the
Registrar for the registration in the year 1960
and 1966. But both the times the registration
application was refused by the registrar. The
Calcutta High Court rejected the appeal on the
ground that the term "simla" is a famous
geographical place. This term cannot be
registered as a trademark. The trade mark
"Simla" with the label is composite in character.
Its essential feature is the word Simla. ''Simla" is
neither an invented word nor is it a word having
a dictionary meaning. It is a well-known hill-
station of India. Its geographical signification is,
therefore, plain and unequivocal. The snow-clad
hills in outline on the label makes the
geographical significance inescapable.
Prohibition of Registration of Names of Chemical
Elements or International Non-Proprietary
Names
Section 13 states that no word (a) which is the
commonly used and accepted name of any
single chemical element or any single chemical
compound (as distinguished from a mixture) in
respect of a chemical substance or preparation,
or (b) which is declared by the World Health
Organisation and notified in the prescribed
manner by the Registrar from time to time, as an
international non-proprietary name or which is
deceptively similar to such name, shall be
registered as a trade mark and any such
registration shall be deemed for the purpose of
section 57 to be an entry made in the register
without sufficient cause or an entry wrongly
remaining on the register, as the circumstances
may require.
Use of Names and Representations of Living
Persons or Persons Recently Dead
Where an application is made for the registration
of a trade mark which falsely suggests a
connection with any living person, or a person
whose death took place within twenty years prior
to the date of application for registration of the
trade mark, the Registrar may, before he
proceeds with the application, require the
applicant to furnish him with the consent in
writing of such living person or, as the case may
be, of the legal representative of the deceased
person to the connection appearing on the trade
mark, and may refuse to proceed with the
application unless the applicant furnishes the
Registrar with such consent.
Withdrawal of Acceptance
Section 19 provides that where, after the
acceptance of an application for registration of a
trade mark but before its registration, the
Registrar is satisfied-
(a) that the application has been accepted in
error; or
(b) that in the circumstances of the case the
trade mark should not be registered or should be
registered subject to conditions or limitations or
to conditions additional to or different from the
conditions or limitations subject to which the
application has been accepted, the Registrar
may, after hearing the applicant if he so desires,
withdraw the acceptance and proceed as if the
application had not been accepted.
Advertisement of Application
According to Section 20, once the Registrar for
registration has accepted the application, he
shall get the application advertised in the
prescribed manner after acceptance. However,
the application shall be advertised before
acceptance if the application is related to a
trademark to which Section 9(1) and Section
11(1) & (2) apply or in any other case as it
seems expedient to the Registrar. The purpose
of advertisement is to give information to the
public at large in respect of the trademark
advertised and afford an opportunity to oppose
the registration of the mark on given grounds. So
the advertisement must be complete in all
respects and otherwise the very purpose of
advertisement will be frustrated. If there is
incomplete or incorrect information in the
advertisement, it would amount to
misrepresentation, which deprives a prospective
opponent of the opportunity to get full information
and of filing an effective opposition.
Registration
Section 23 states that subject to the provisions
of section 19, when an application for
registration of a trade mark has been accepted
and either:-
(a) the application has not been opposed and the
time for notice of opposition has expired; or
(b) the application has been opposed and the
opposition has been decided in favour of the
applicant, the Registrar shall, unless the Central
Government otherwise directs, register the said
trade mark within eighteen months of the filing of
the application and the trade mark when
registered shall be registered as of the date of
the making of the said application and that date
shall, subject to the provisions of section 154, be
deemed to be the date of registration.
On the registration of a trade mark, the Registrar
shall issue to the applicant a certificate in the
prescribed form of the registration thereof,
sealed with the seal of the Trade Marks Registry.
Where registration of a trade mark is not
completed within twelve months from the date of
the application by reason of default on the part
of the applicant, the Registrar may, after giving
notice to the applicant in the prescribed manner,
treat the application as abandoned unless it is
completed within the time specified in that behalf
in the notice.
The Registrar may amend the register or a
certificate of registration for the purpose of
correcting a clerical error or an obvious mistake.
Duration, Renewal, Removal and Restoration of
Registration
Section 25 of the Act deals with duration,
renewal of registration, for removal and
restoration of registration. It allows registration of
a trademark for a period of 10 years. In keeping
with the generally accepted international practice
and to reduce the work-load of the Trade Marks
Office, Section 25 allows renewal of registration
for successive periods of 10 years, from the date
of the original registration or the last renewal.
With a view to facilitate renewal of registration,
Section 25(4) provides for restoration of
removed trade marks on payment of renewal
fee.
Can a Registered Trademark be Removed from
the Register?
It can be removed on application to the Registrar
on prescribed form on the ground that the mark
is wrongly remaining on the register. The
Registrar also can suo moto issue Notice for
removal of a registered trademark.
Infringement of Registered Trade Marks
A person shall be deemed to have infringed a
registered trade mark, if he uses a mark which is
identical with or similar to the registered trade
mark, and is used in relation to goods or services
which are not similar to those for which
trademark is registered; and the registered trade
mark has a reputation in India and the use of the
mark without due cause would take unfair
advantage of or is detrimental to the distinctive
character or repute of the registered trade mark.
Section 29 dealing with infringement of
trademarks, explicitly enumerates the grounds
which constitute infringement of a trademark.
Section 29(1) provides that a registered trade
mark is infringed by a person who, not being a
registered proprietor or a person using by way of
permitted use, uses in the course of trade, a
mark which is identical with, or deceptively
similar to, the trade mark in relation to goods or
services in respect of which the trade mark is
registered and in such manner as to render the
use of the mark likely to be taken as being used
as a trade mark.
As per section 29(2) of the Act, a registered
trade mark is infringed by a person who, not
being a registered proprietor or a person using
by way of permitted use, uses in the course of
trade, a mark which because of-
(a) its identity with the registered trade mark and
the similarity of the goods or services covered by
such registered trade mark; or
(b) its similarity to the registered trade mark and
the identity or similarity of the goods or services
covered by such registered trade mark; or
(c) its identity with the registered trade mark and
the identity of the goods or services covered by
such registered trade mark, is likely to cause
confusion on the part of the public, or is likely to
have an association with the registered trade
mark.
Section 29(3) states that in any case falling
under section 29(2)(c), the court shall presume
that it is likely to cause confusion on the part of
the public.
Section 29(4) provides that a registered trade
mark is infringed by a person who, not being a
registered proprietor or a person using by way of
permitted use, uses in the course of trade, a
mark which-
(a) is identical with or similar to the registered
trade mark; and
(b) is used in relation to goods or services which
are not similar to those for which the trade mark
is registered; and
(c) the registered trade mark has a reputation in
India and the use of the mark without due cause
takes unfair advantage of or is detrimental to, the
distinctive character or repute of the registered
trade mark.
According to Section 29(5) of the Ac, a
registered trade mark is infringed by a person if
he uses such registered trade mark, as his trade
name or part of his trade name, or name of his
business concern or part of the name, of his
business concern dealing in goods or services in
respect of which the trade mark is registered.
Section 29(6) provides that a person uses a
registered mark, if, in particular, he:-
(a) affixes it to goods or the packaging thereof;
(b) offers or exposes goods for sale, puts them
on the market, or stocks them for those
purposes under the registered trade mark, or
offers or supplies services under the registered
trade mark;
(c) imports or exports goods under the mark; or
(d) uses the registered trade mark on business
papers or in advertising.
Section 29(7) states that a registered trade mark
is infringed by a person who applies such
registered trade mark to a material intended to
be used for labeling or packaging goods, as a
business paper, or for advertising goods or
services, provided such person, when he applied
the mark, knew or had reason to believe that the
application of the mark was not duly authorised
by the proprietor or a licensee.
As per Section 29(8) a registered trade mark is
infringed by any advertising of that trade mark if
such advertising:-
(a) takes unfair advantage of and is contrary to
honest practices in industrial or commercial
matters; or
                                                       (c) is against
                                                       the reputation
                                                       of the trade
(b) is detrimental to its distinctive character; or    mark.
Section 29(9) provides that where the distinctive
elements of a registered trade mark consist of or
include words, the trade mark may be infringed
by the spoken use of those words as well as by
their visual representation and reference in this
section to the use of a mark shall be construed
accordingly.
In the case of Renaissance Hotel Holdings Inc.
vs. B. Vijaya Sai and Ors. (Civil Appeal No. 404
OF 2022) (Arising out of SLP(C) No. 21428 of
2019) judgement dated 19.01.2022 appeal was
filed against the observation of High Court that
they did not see any infringement of the
Appellant's trade mark "RENAISSANCE" with
that of "SAI RENAISSANCE" of Respondents-
Defendants. Also, that no evidence of a trans-
border reputation for its mark or of any damage
to reputation was presented. Therefore, this
appeal was presented. Supreme Court held that
that High Court has erred in their opinion and
that respondents/defendants had infringed on
the appellant/ trademark plaintiff's
"RENAISSANCE".
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India inter alia
observed that:
A perusal of subsection (2) of Section 29 of the
said Act would reveal that a registered trade
mark would be infringed by a person, who not
being a registered proprietor or a person using
by way of permitted use, uses in the course of
trade, a mark which because of the three
eventualities mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and
(c), is likely to cause confusion on the part of the
public, or which is likely to have an association
with the registered trade mark. The first
eventuality covered by clause (a) being its
identity with the registered trade mark and the
similarity of the goods or services covered by
such registered trade mark. The second one
covered by clause (b) being its similarity to the
registered trade mark and the identity or
similarity of the goods or services covered by
such registered trade mark. The third eventuality
stipulated in clause (c) would be its identity with
the registered trade mark and the identity of the
goods or services covered by such registered
trade mark.
It is, however, pertinent to note that by virtue of
subsection (3) of Section 29 of the said Act, the
legislative intent insofar as the eventuality
contained in clause (c) is concerned, is clear.
Subsection (3) of Section 29 of the said Act
provides that in any case falling under clause (c)
of subsection (2) of Section 29 of the said Act,
the Court shall presume that it is likely to cause
confusion on the part of the public. Subsection
(4) of Section 29 of the said Act provides that a
registered trade mark is infringed by a person
who, not being a registered proprietor or a
person using by way of permitted use, uses in
the course of trade, a mark which is identical with
or similar to the registered trade mark; and is
used in relation to goods or services which are
not similar to those for which the trade mark is
registered; and the registered trade mark has a
reputation in India and the use of the mark
without due cause takes unfair advantage of or is
detrimental to, the distinctive character or repute
of the registered trade mark.
Subsection (5) of Section 29 of the said Act
provides that a registered trade mark is infringed
by a person if he uses such registered trade
mark, as his trade name or part of his trade
name, or name of his business concern or part of
the name, of his business concern dealing in
goods or services in respect of which the trade
mark is registered.
Subsection (6) of Section 29 of the said Act
provides that for the purposes of this section, a
person uses a registered mark, if, in particular,
he affixes it to goods or the packaging thereof;
offers or exposes goods for sale, puts them on
the market, or stocks them for those purposes
under the registered trade mark, or offers or
supplies services under the registered trade
mark; imports or exports goods under the mark;
or uses the registered trade mark on business
papers or in advertising.
Subsection (7) of Section 29 of the said Act
provides that a registered trade mark is infringed
by a person who applies such registered trade
mark to a material intended to be used for
labelling or packaging goods, as a business
paper, or for advertising goods or services,
provided such person, when he applied the
mark, knew or had reason to believe that the
application of the mark was not duly authorized
by the proprietor or a licensee.
Subsection (8) of Section 29 of the said Act
provides that a registered trade mark is infringed
by any advertising of that trade mark if such
advertising takes unfair advantage of and is
contrary to honest practices in industrial or
commercial matters; or is detrimental to its
distinctive character; or is against the reputation
of the trade mark.
Subsection (9) of Section 29 of the said Act
provides that where the distinctive elements of a
registered trade mark consist of or include
words, the trade mark may be infringed by the
spoken use of those words as well as by their
visual representation and reference in this
section to the use of a mark shall be construed
accordingly.
The legislative scheme is clear that when the
mark of the defendant is identical with the
registered trade mark of the plaintiff and the
goods or services covered are similar to the
ones covered by such registered trade mark, it
may be necessary to prove that it is likely to
cause confusion on the part of the public, or
which is likely to have an association with the
registered trade mark. Similarly, when the trade
mark of the plaintiff is similar to the registered
trade mark of the defendant and the goods or
services covered by such registered trade mark
are identical or similar to the goods or services
covered by such registered trade mark, it may
again be necessary to establish that it is likely to
cause confusion on the part of the public.
However, when the trade mark of the defendant
is identical with the registered trade mark of the
plaintiff and that the goods or services of the
defendant are identical with the goods or
services covered by registered trade mark, the
Court shall presume that it is likely to cause
confusion on the part of the public.
It is thus trite law that while interpreting the
provisions of a statute, it is necessary that the
textual interpretation should be matched with the
contextual one. The Act must be looked at as a
whole and it must be discovered what each
section, each clause, each phrase and each
word is meant and designed to say as to fit into
the scheme of the entire Act. No part of a statute
and no word of a statute can be construed in
isolation. Statutes have to be construed so that
every word has a place and everything is in its
place. As already discussed hereinabove, the
said Act has been enacted by the legislature
taking into consideration the increased
globalization of trade and industry, the need to
encourage investment flows and transfer of
technology, and the need for simplification and
harmonization of trade mark management
systems. One of the purposes for which the said
Act has been enacted is prohibiting the use of
someone else's trade mark as a part of the
corporate name or the name of business
concern. If the entire scheme of the Act is
construed as a whole, it provides for the rights
conferred by registration and the right to sue for
infringement of the registered trade mark by its
proprietor. The legislative scheme as enacted
under the said statute elaborately provides for
the eventualities in which a proprietor of the
registered trade mark can bring an action for
infringement of the trade mark and the limits on
effect of the registered trade mark. By picking up
a part of the provisions in subsection (4) of
Section 29 of the said Act and a part of the
provision in subsection (1) of Section 30 of the
said Act and giving it a textual meaning without
considering the context in which the said
provisions have to be construed, in our view,
would not be permissible. We are at pains to say
that the High Court fell in error in doing so.
We are, therefore, of the considered view that
the High Court fell in error on various counts.
The present case stood squarely covered by the
provisions of Section 29(2)(c) read with
subsection (3) of Section 29 of the said Act. The
present case also stood covered under
subsections (5) and (9) of Section 29 of the said
Act. The High Court has erred in taking into
consideration clause (c) of subsection (4) of
Section 29 of the said Act in isolation without
noticing other parts of the said subsection (4) of
Section 29 of the said Act and the import
thereof. The High Court has failed to take into
consideration that in order to avail the benefit of
Section 30 of the said Act, apart from
establishing that the use of the impugned trade
mark was not such as to take unfair advantage
of or is detrimental to the distinctive character or
repute of the trade mark, it is also necessary to
establish that such a use is in accordance with
the honest practices in industrial or commercial
matters. As such, we have no hesitation to hold
that the High Court was not justified in interfering
with the well-reasoned order of the trial court.
In the case of Imperial Tobacco Co. of India Ltd.
vs. The Registrar of Trade Marks Calcutta High
Court judgement dated 28 May, 1968 , the
Imperial Tobacco Company manufactured and
distributed cigarettes with a label "simla" all over
the country. ITC ltd. made an application to the
Registrar for the registration in the year 1960
and 1966. But both the times the registration
application was refused by the registrar. The
Calcutta High Court rejected the appeal on the
ground that the term "simla" is a famous
geographical place. This term cannot be
registered as a trademark. The trade mark
"Simla" with the label is composite in character.
Its essential feature is the word Simla. ''Simla" is
neither an invented word nor is it a word having
a dictionary meaning. It is a well-known hill-
station of India. Its geographical signification is,
therefore, plain and unequivocal. The snow-clad
hills in outline on the label makes the
geographical significance inescapable.
A suit was brought against Amul Canada by the
Kaira District Cooperative Milk Producers Union
Limited (Amul Dairy) and the Gujarat
Cooperative Milk Marketing Federation
(GCMMF), AMUL's official brand's distributors.
The dairy behemoth discovered that the
organisation had imitated the trademark "Amul"
and the slogan "Amul - The Taste of India" in
January 2020. The four people were listed as
Amul Canada workers. Amul testified before the
court that he never granted Amul Canada or any
of the four people permission to utilise their
trademarks and copyrights.
Canadian Court opined that the defendants had
violated and infringed the copyright and
trademark. The court awarded CAD 32,733
(around Rs 19.5 lakh) in damages and issued an
order prohibiting the defendants from using
"Amul" and "Amul-The Taste of India" copyright
and trademark.
Limits on Effect of Registered Trade Mark
Section 30 enumerates certain acts which do not
constitute infringement. This section explicitly
states that nothing in section 29 shall be
construed as preventing the use of a registered
trade mark by any person for the purposes of
identifying goods or services as those of the
proprietor provided the use- (a) is in accordance
with honest practices in industrial or commercial
matters, and
(b) is not such as to take unfair advantage of or
be detrimental to the distinctive character or
repute of the trade mark.
Section 30(2) states that a registered trade mark
is not infringed where-
(a) the use in relation to goods or services
indicates the kind, quality, quantity, intended
purpose, value, geographical origin, the time of
production of goods or of rendering of services
or other characteristics of goods or services;
(b) a trade mark is registered subject to any
conditions or limitations, the use of the trade
mark in any manner in relation to goods to be
sold or otherwise traded in, in any place, or in
relation to goods to be exported to any market or
in relation to services for use or available for
acceptance in any place or country outside India
or in any other circumstances, to which, having
regard to those conditions or limitations, the
registration does not extend;
(c) the use by a person of a trade mark-
(i) in relation to goods connected in the course of
trade with the proprietor or a registered user of
the trade mark if, as to those goods or a bulk of
which they form part, the registered proprietor or
the registered user conforming to the permitted
use has applied the trade mark and has not
subsequently removed or obliterated it, or has at
any time expressly or impliedly consented to the
use of the trade mark; or
(ii) in relation to services to which the proprietor
of such mark or of a registered user conforming
to the permitted use has applied the mark, where
the purpose and effect of the use of the mark is
to indicate, in accordance with the fact, that
those services have been performed by the
proprietor or a registered user of the mark;
(d) the use of a trade mark by a person in
relation to goods adapted to form part of, or to
be accessory to, other goods or services in
relation to which the trade mark has been used
without infringement of the right given by
registration under this Act or might for the time
being be so used, if the use of the trade mark is
reasonably necessary in order to indicate that
the goods or services are so adapted, and
neither the purpose nor the effect of the use of
the trade mark is to indicate, otherwise than in
accordance with the fact, a connection in the
course of trade between any person and the
goods or services, as the case may be;
(e) the use of a registered trade mark, being one
of two or more trademarks registered under this
Act which are identical or nearly resemble each
other, in exercise of the right to the use of that
trade mark given by registration under this Act.
The Madras High Court in Consim Info Pvt. Ltd
vs. Google India Pvt. Ltd. 2013 (54) PTC 578
(Mad), relied upon two U.S. Ninth Circuit
judgments, to interpret the meaning of the words
'reasonably necessary' used in section 30(2)(d)
and held that for any unauthorized use of the
trademark to be considered a 'nominative fair
use', it must meet three tests viz., (i) the product
or service in question must be one not readily
identifiable without use of the trademark; (ii) only
so much of the mark or marks may be used as is
reasonably necessary to identify the product or
service; and (iii) the user must do nothing that
would, in conjunction with the mark, suggest
sponsorship or endorsement by the proprietor of
the trademark.
As per Section 30(3) of the Act, where the goods
bearing a registered trade mark are lawfully
acquired by a person, the sale of the goods in
the market or otherwise dealing in those goods
by that person or by a person claiming under or
through him is not infringement of a trade mark
by reason only of-
(a) the registered trade mark having been
assigned by the registered proprietor to some
other person, after the acquisition of those
goods; or
(b) the goods having been put on the market
under the registered trade mark by the proprietor
or with his consent.
Section 30 (3) shall not apply where there exists
legitimate reasons for the proprietor to oppose
further dealings in the goods in particular, where
the condition of the goods, has been changed or
impaired after they have been put on the market.
In the case, Samsung Electronics Company
Limited and Ors. vs. Kapil Wadhwa and Ors.
(17.02.2012 - Delhi High Court): MIPR 2012 (2)
1: 2012 (49) PTC 571 (Del): 2012(4) R.A.J. 13,
the plaintiffs have raised the complaint before
this court by preferring a suit for infringement of
the trade mark and passing off the mark
SAMSUNG. Court held that "Section 30(3) of the
Trade Marks Act, 1999 acts as an exception to
the infringement of registered trade marks as the
head note of Section 30 itself speaks for itself
which says limits on the effects of registered
trademark and the wordings of Section 30(3) in
particular also states that the selling of goods in
the market or otherwise dealing in those goods is
not an infringement of trademark. The said
exception operates in the nature of defence to
an infringement wherein the person using the
mark in a particular form or dealing otherwise in
the goods under the mark can plead that the said
goods are lawfully acquired from the market
wherein the proprietor has also put the goods in
the market or the proprietor has given consent to
the effect of such dealings or usage. The
provision relating to exhaustion or proprietor's
consent is a complete defense to an
infringement act. Therefore, the nature and the
scope of Section 30(3) is that it operates as a
defence to the infringing act and cannot be said
to giving any additional right beyond the same."
PASSINg OFF
Black's Law Dictionary defines passing off as
"the act or an instance falsely representing one's
own product as that of another in an attempt to
deceive potential buyers. Passing off is
actionable in tort under the law of unfair
competition. It may be actionable as trademark
infringement".
With the tremendous growth in trade and
commerce, the competitors or other traders tend
to imitate the wellknown or reputed trademarks
by imitating colour scheme or get up or
packaging with a view to pass off such goods as
goods of the genuine owner. In cases of
registered trademarks, the owner can move the
court under this Act for the infringement whereas
in cases of the unregistered trademarks, the Act
recognizes the Common Law remedy of passing
off. The tort of passing off is based upon the
principle that "no man is entitled to represent his
goods as being the goods of another man; and
no man is required to use any mark, sign or
symbol, device or means, whereby without
making a direct representation himself to a
purchaser who purchases from him, he enables
such purchaser to tell a lie or to make a false
representation to somebody else who is the
ultimate purchaser."

The plaintiff, in an action of passing off, has to
establish that his business or goods has
acquired the reputation and that his mark has
become distinctive of his goods among the
public at large. He has to establish that there is
likely hood of deception or confusion in the
minds of the public. He, however, does not have
to establish the fraudulent intention on the part of
the defendant. Thirdly, he has to establish that
confusion is likely to cause damage or injury to
the reputation, goodwill and fair name of the
plaintiff. He need not prove the actual loss or
damage in an action of passing off.
                                                       The nature of
In the case of Mahendra and Mahendra Paper             the marks i.e.
Mills Ltd. vs. Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd. [AIR         whether the
2002 SC 117] Supreme Court broadly stated, in          marks are
an action for passing off on the basis of              word marks or
unregistered trade mark generally for deciding         labels marks
the question of deceptive similarity the following     or composite
factors are to be considered- ?                        marks i.e.
both words and label works.
                                                      The nature of
                                                      the goods in The similarity in
                                                      respect of    nature, character
l The degree of resembleness between the              which they    and performance
marks, phonetically similar and hence similar in are used as of the goods of the
idea. ?                                               trademarks. ? rival traders.
l Class of purchasers who are likely to buy the
goods bearing the marks they require, on their
education and intelligence and a degree of care
they are likely to exercise in purchasing and /or
using the goods.
l The mode of purchasing the goods or placing
orders for the goods.
l Any other surrounding circumstances which
may be relevant in the extant of dissimilarity
between the competing marks.
Weightage to be given to each of the aforesaid
factors depending upon facts of each case and
the same weightage cannot be given to each
factor in every case.
Registration to be Prima Facie Evidence of
validity
Section 31 of the Act stipulates that in all legal
proceedings relating to trade mark registered
under the Act, the original registration and all
subsequent assignments and transmission
thereof shall be prima facie evidence of its
validity. However, as per Section 34 the
proprietor or a registered user of a registered
trademark is not entitled to interfere with or
restrain the use by any person of a trademark
identical with or nearly resembling it in relation to
goods or services in relation to which that person
or a predecessor in title of his has continuously
used that trade mark from a prior date.
Therefore, in case of unregistered marks, the
owner of the trade mark may lodge a case
against passing off action in case his trademark
is used by some other person. It has been held
by the courts in various cases and the ownership
of a trademark is decided by its usage in
commercial transactions.
The Supreme Court in Uniply Industries Ltd. vs.
Unicorn Plywood Pvt. Ltd. and Others observed
that:
(i) for inherently distinctive marks ownership is
governed by priority of use for such marks. The
first user of sale of goods/services is the owner
who is senior to others.
(ii) These marks are given legal protection
against infringement immediately upon adoption
and use in trade.
(iii) Some courts indicate that even prior sales of
goods - though small in size with the mark - are
sufficient to establish priority, the test being to
determine continuous prior user and the volume
of sale or the degree of familiarity of the public
with the mark.
Therefore, the proprietorship of the trademark is
decided by the date of usage of the mark by a
person in business transactions.
Assignment and Transmission
Section 37 entitles the registered proprietor of a
trademark to assign the trade mark and to give
effectual receipts for any consideration for such
assignment. Section 38 deals with the
assignability and transmissibility of a registered
trade mark with or without goodwill of the
business either in respect of all goods or
services or part thereof. Section 39 provides that
unregistered trade mark may be assigned or
transmitted with or without the goodwill of the
business concerned.
Section 40 contains restriction on assignments
or transmissions of trade mark where multiple
exclusive rights would be created in more than
one person in relation to same goods or
services; same description of goods or services;
goods or services or description of goods or
services which are associated with each other,
which would be likely to deceive or cause
confusion. Nevertheless, such assignment is not
deemed to be invalid, if having regard to the
limitations imposed, the goods are to be sold in
different markets - either within India or through
exports.
Section 42 stipulates conditions for assignment
of a trade mark without goodwill of business.
Such an assignment shall not take effect unless
the assignor obtains directions of the Registrar
and advertises the assignment in accordance
with the directions of the Registrar and as per
the prescribed manner.
Section 43 deals with the assignability and
transmissibility of certification trade marks and
provides that the assignment of certification
trade mark can only be done only with the
consent of the Registrar. Section 44 states that
associated trademarks shall be assignable and
transmissible only as a whole but they will be
treated as separate trade marks for all other
purposes. Section 45 deals with the procedure
for registration of assignment and transmission
and provides that where the validity of an
assignment is in dispute between the parties, the
Registrar may refuse to register the assignment
or transmission unless the rights of parties are
determined by the competent court.
Proposed Use of Trade Mark by Company to be
Formed
Section 46 empowers the Registrar to allow
registration of a trademark, if he is satisfied that-
(i) a company is about to be formed and
registered under the Companies Act and that the
applicant intends to assign the trademark to that
company with a view to use thereof in relation to
those goods and services by the company; or
(ii) the proprietor intends it to be used by a
person, as a registered user after the registration
of trademark.
Removal of Trade Mark for Non-use
Section 47 deals with removal of a trade mark
from the register on the ground of non-use and
provides that a trade mark which is not used
within five years of its registration, becomes
liable for removal either completely or in respect
of those goods or services for which the mark
has not been used. The five years period starts
from the date on which the trade mark is actually
entered on the register. However, Section 47(3)
protects a mark from being removed from the
register on ground of non-use if such non-use is
shown to have been due to special
circumstances in the trade which may include
restriction imposed by any law or regulation on
the use of trade mark in India.
Registered User
Section 48 deals with registered users. Section
49 provides for registration as registered user.
Section 50 deals with the power of the Registrar
to vary or cancel registration as registered user
on the ground that the registered user has used
the trade mark otherwise than in accordance
with the agreement or in such a way as to cause
or likely to cause confusion, or deception or the
proprietor/registered user misrepresented or has
failed to disclose any material facts for such
registration or the stipulation in the agreement
regarding the quality of goods is not enforced or
the circumstances have changed since the date
of registration, etc. However, Registrar has been
put under obligation to give reasonable
opportunity of hearing before cancellation of
registration.
In view of the simplification of the procedure for
registration of registered user and to ascertain
whether the registered user agreement is in
force, Section 51 empowers the Registrar to
require the proprietor to confirm at any time
during the continuation of registration as
registered user, whether the agreement, on the
basis of which registered user was registered is
still in force, and if such confirmation is not
received within a period of one month, the
Registrar shall remove the entry thereof from the
Register in the prescribed manner. Section 52
recognises the right of registered user to take
proceedings against infringement. Section 54
provides that the registered user will not have a
right of assignment or transmission. However, it
is clarified that where an individual registered
user enters into partnership or remains in a
reconstituted firm, the use of the mark by the firm
would not amount to assignment or transmission.
Collective Marks
Collective Marks means a trades mark
distinguish the goods or services of members of
an association of person not being a partnership
within the meaning of the Indian Partnership Act,
1932 which is the proprietor of the mark from
those of others.
Sections 61 to 68 contain provisions relating to
the registration of Collective trade marks. These
sections provide for registration of a collective
mark which belongs to a group or association of
persons and the use thereof is reserved for
members of the group or association of persons.
Collective marks serve to distinguish
characteristic features of the products or
services offered by those enterprises. It may be
owned by an association which may not use the
collective mark but whose members may use the
same. The association ensures compliance of
certain quality standards by its members, who
may use the collective mark if they comply with
the prescribed requirements concerning its use.
The primary function of a collective mark is to
indicate a trade connection with the Association
or Organisation.
Certification Trade Marks
Certification trade mark as to mean a mark
capable of distinguishing the goods or services
in connection with which it is used in the course
of trade which are certified by the proprietor of
the mark in respect of origin, material, mode of
manufacture of goods or performance of
services, quality, accuracy or other
characteristics from goods or services not so
certified and registerable as such in respect of
those goods or services in the name, as
proprietor of the certification trade mark, of that
person.
Sections 69 to 78 deal with registration of
certification trade mark. The purpose of
certification trade mark is to show that the goods
on which the mark is used have been certified by
some competent person in respect of certain
characteristics of the goods such as origin,
mode of manufacture, quality, etc. The proprietor
of a certification trade mark does not himself deal
in the goods. A certification trade mark may be
used in addition to the users own trade mark on
his goods. Central Government empower the
final authority for registration of certification trade
mark to the Registrar.
Appointment of Registrar and Trade Mark
Registry
Section 3 provides for appointment of the
Registrar and other officers and Section 4
empowers the Registrar to withdraw any matter
pending before an officer and deal with such
matter himself or transfer it to another officer
with reasons for such transfer to be recorded
therein. Section 5 deals with the establishment
of the Trade Marks Registry and branch offices
and provides that the Trade Marks Registry
established under the Trade and Merchandise
Marks Act, 1958 shall continue to be the Trade
Marks Registry for the purposes of this Act.
Register of Trade Marks
Section 6 contains provisions relating to
maintenance of a single Register of Trade Marks
at Head Office including therein particulars of
registered trademarks and other prescribed
particulars, except notice of trust. A copy of the
Register is to be kept at each branch office. Sub-
section (2) allows the maintenance of records in
computer floppies or diskettes or in any other
electronic form subject to the prescribed
safeguards.
What does the Register of Trademark Contain?
The register of trademark currently maintained in
electronic form contains inter alia the trademark
the class and goods/ services in respect of which
it is registered including particulars affecting the
scope of registration of rights conferred; the
address of the proprietors; particulars of trade or
other description of the proprietor; the
convention application date (if applicable); where
a trademark has been registered with the
consent of proprietor of an earlier mark or earlier
rights, that fact.
Classification of goods and Services and
Publication of Index
Section 7 empowers the Registrar to classify
goods and services according to international
classification of goods and services and to
determine any question related thereto. Section
8 requires the Registrar to publish an
alphabetical index of classification of goods and
services.
According to Rule 20 of the Trade Marks Rules,
2017, classification of goods and service for the
purpose of registration of trademark, the goods
and services shall be classified as per current
edition of "the International Classification of
goods and services (NICE classification)"
published by the World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO). The Registrar shall publish
a class wise and an alphabetical index of such
goods and services, including goods and
services of Indian origin.
Trade Mark Agent
Section 145 deals with agents and provide that
Where, by or under the Trade Marks Act, any
act, other than the making of an affidavit, is
required to be done before the Registrar by any
person, the act may, subject to the rules made in
this behalf, be done instead of by that person
himself, by a person duly authorised in the
prescribed manner, who is- (a) a legal
practitioner, or
                                                      (b) a person
                                                      registered in
                                                      the
                                                      prescribed      (c) a person in the
                                                      manner as a     sole and regular
                                                      trade marks     employment of the
                                                      agent, or       principal.
Qualifications for Registration
Rule 144 of the Trade Marks Rule states that
subject to the provisions of Rule 145, a person
shall be qualified to be registered as a
trademarks agent if he-
(i) is a citizen of India,
(ii) is not less than 21 years of age;
(iii) is a graduate of any university in India or
possesses an equivalent qualification and has
passed the
examination prescribed in rule 148 or is an
Advocate within the meaning of the Advocates
Act, 1961 or is a member of the Institute of
Company Secretaries of India;
(iv) is considered by the Registrar as a fit and
proper person to be registered as a trademark
agent.
Manner of Making Application for Trademarks
Agent
All applications under the provisions of Part IV of
the Trade Marks Rules, 2017 shall be made in
duplicate and shall be sent to or submitted at
that office of the Trade Marks Registry within
whose territorial limits the principal place of
business of the applicant is situate.
Application for Registration as a Trademarks
Agent
Every person desiring to be registered as a
trademarks agent shall make an application in
Form TM-G. The applicant shall furnish such
further information bearing on his application as
may be required of him at any time by the
Registrar.
LESSON ROUND-UP
* Trade Mark distinguishes the goods of one
manufacturer or trader from similar goods of
others and therefore, it seeks to protect the
interest of the consumer as well as the trader. A
trade mark may consist of a device depicting the
picture of animals, human beings etc., words,
letters, numerals, signatures or any combination
thereof.
* The Trade Marks Act, 1999 and the Trade
Marks Rules, 2017 govern the law relating to
Trade Marks in India.
* Object of trademark law is to permit an
enterprise by registering its trademark to obtain
an exclusive right to use, share, or assign a
mark. Closely related to trademarks are service
marks which distinguish the services of an
enterprise from the services of other enterprise.
l Mark includes a device, brand, heading, label,
ticket, name, signature, word, letter, numeral,
shape of goods, packaging or combination of
colours or any combination thereof.
                                                    ? A well-
                                                    known trade
                                                    mark in
                                                    relation to any
                                                    goods or
                                                    services
                                                    means a mark
                                                    which has
                                                    become so to
                                                    the
                                                    substantial
                                                    segment of
                                                    the public
                                                    which uses
                                                    such goods or
                                                    services such
                                                    that the use
                                                    of such mark
                                                    in relation to
                                                    other goods
                                                    or services
                                                    would be
                                                    likely to be
                                                    taken as
                                                    indicating a
                                                    connection in
                                                    the course of
                                                    trade or
                                                    rendering of
                                                    services
                                                    between
                                                    those goods
                                                    or services
                                                    and a person
                                                    using the
                                                    mark in
                                                    relation to the
                                                    first-
                                                    mentioned
                                                    goods or
                                                    services.
                                                    When a
                                                    registered
                                                    trade mark is
                                                    used by a
                                                    person who is
                                                    not entitled to
l A trade mark performs four functions: It          use such a
identifies the goods/or services and its origin; It trade mark
guarantees its unchanged quality; It advertises under the law,
the goods/services; It creates an image for the it constitutes
goods/ services.                                    infringement.
l A person shall be deemed to have infringed a
registered trade mark, if he uses a mark which is
identical with or similar to the registered trade
mark, and is used in relation to goods or services
which are not similar to those for which
trademark is registered; and the registered trade
mark has a reputation in India and the use of the
mark without due cause would take unfair
advantage of or is detrimental to the distinctive
character or repute of the registered trade mark.
l There will be no infringement of trade mark, if
the use of a mark is in accordance with honest
practices in industrial or commercial matters and
is not such as to take unfair advantage of or be
detrimental to the distinctive character or repute
of a trade mark.
l The registered proprietor of a trademark to
assign the trade mark and to give effectual
receipts for any consideration for such
assignment.
l A trade mark which is not used within five years
of its registration becomes liable for removal
either completely or in respect of those goods or
services for which the mark has not been used.
TEST YOURSELF
(These are meant for re-capitulation only.
Answers to these questions are not to be
submitted for evaluation)
1. What is a trade mark?
2. How to apply for a trade mark in respect of
particular goods or services?
3. Discuss in detail the provisions relating to
registered user of trademarks.
4. Benefit from trademark to all stakeholders.
Comment.
5. Discuss Certification Trademark.
LIST OF FURTHER READINgS
l Bare Act - Trademark Act, 1999 and rules
made thereunder.
l Trade Marks And Passing-Off - Venkateswaran
& K.C. Kailasam
OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDINg
WEbSITES / vIDEO LINKS)
? https://ipindia.gov.in/trade-marks.htm




REgULATORY FRAMEWORK
                                                     The CopyrightThe Copyright
?                                                    Act, 1957 ? Rules, 2013
The Copyright Act, 1957 protects original literary,
dramatic, musical and artistic works and
cinematograph films and sound recordings from
unauthorized uses. Under Article 9.2 of the
TRIPS Agreements, copyright protects the
expressions and not the ideas. There is no
copyright protection for ideas, procedures, and
methods of operation or mathematical concepts
as such.
INTRODUCTION
Copyright is a well recognised form of property
right which had its roots in the common law
system and subsequently came to be governed
by the national laws in each country. Copyright
as the name suggests arose as an exclusive
right of the author to copy the literature produced
by him and stop others from doing so. There are
well-known instances of legal intervention to
punish a person for copying literary or aesthetic
output of another even before the concept of
copyright took shape. The concept of idea was
originally concerned with the field of literature
and arts. In view of technological advancements
in recent times, copyright protection has been
expanded considerably. Today, copyright law
has extended protection not only to literary,
dramatic, musical and artistic works but also
sound recordings, films, broadcasts, cable
programmes and typographical arrangements of
publications. Computer programs have also
been brought within the purview of copyright law.
Copyright deals with the rights of intellectual
creators in their creation. The copyright law
deals with the particular forms of creativity,
concerned primarily with mass communication. It
is also concerned with virtually all forms and
methods of public communication, not only
printed publications but also with such matters
as sound, and television broadcasting, films for
public exhibition etc. and even computerised
systems for the storage and retrieval of
information.
In India, the law relating to copyright is governed
by the Copyright Act, 1957 which has been
amended in 1983, 1984, 1985, 1991, 1992,
1994, 1999 and 2012 and 2021. The copyright
law aims to endorse exclusive forms of artistic
works at the same time safeguarding the rights
of its inventor. The scope of the law extends as
far as literary, music, software, graphics,
choreography, movies and likewise is
concerned. These categories are further sub-
categorised into books, documentaries, painting,
articles and likewise, which aim in promoting
work and not ideas. It is to be noted that the
work of the creator is protected by the copyright
law irrespective of its content or quality. Although
the registration of the work is not a mandate,
nevertheless it is always advisable to register the
work the moment it is put to force.
What is Copyright?
Copyright (or author's right) is a legal term used
to describe the rights that creators have over
their literary and artistic works. Works covered by
copyright range from books, music, paintings,
sculpture, and films, to computer programs,
databases, advertisements, maps, and technical
drawings.
The object of copyright is to protect and reward
the general advantages i.e. the authors' labour
on the created work. This helps the writers to
constantly produce and carry out more plays. It is
important to note that in a given work, copyright
law protects the "type of material
communication," not the individual concepts,
ideas, techniques or details. That is the reason
why work has to be set in a physical form to be
covered by copyright. A few examples of works
being tangibly set to include stories written on
paper and initial canvas paintings. The forms of
work protected by copyright laws include, among
other items, song lyrics, books, playbacks,
images, computer programs, and emails.
Though, you can't copyright stuff like ideas, titles,
names, details etc. Publishing is important for
businesses because it only gives the author of
the work exclusive rights to replicate their works,
create derivative works, distribute and sell any
copies of the work, show and publicly perform
copyrighted works. You may grant certain rights
as a package or separately. This also helps
owners to produce income if any other individual
opts for reproducing the job.
Why should Copyright be Protected?
Copyright ensures certain minimum safeguards
of the rights of authors over their creations,
thereby protecting and rewarding creativity.
Creativity being the keystone of progress, no
civilized society can afford to ignore the basic
requirement of encouraging the same. Economic
and social development of a society is
dependent on creativity. The protection provided
by copyright to the efforts of writers, artists,
designers, dramatists, musicians, architects and
producers of sound recordings, cinematograph
films and computer software, creates an
atmosphere conducive to creativity, which
induces them to create more and motivates
others to create.
The Copyright Act provides an economic right to
the author to reproduce the work, to issue
copies, to perform or communicate it to the
public, to make any cinematograph film or sound
recording or to make any adaptation or
translation of the work. The Act also provides a
right to claim authorship of the work; an integrity
right- right to protect one's honor and reputation
and a general right- right to not have a work
falsely attributed to oneself. These moral rights
remain with the author even after assignment of
the copyright.
It may be noted that:
Adaptation means,-
(i) in relation to a dramatic work, the conversion
of the work into a non-dramatic work;
(ii) in relation to a literary work or an artistic work,
the conversion of the work into a dramatic work
by way of performance in public or otherwise;
(iii) in relation to a literary or dramatic work, any
abridgement of the work or any version of the
work in which the story or action is conveyed
wholly or mainly by means of pictures in a form
suitable for reproduction in a book, or in a
newspaper, magazine or similar periodical;
(iv) in relation to a musical work, any
arrangement or transcription of the work; and
(v) in relation to any work, any use of such work
involving its re-arrangement or alteration.
Communication to the public means making any
work or performance available for being seen or
heard or otherwise enjoyed by the public directly
or by any means of display or diffusion other
than by issuing physical copies of it, whether
simultaneously or at places and times chosen
individually, regardless of whether any member
of the public actually sees, hears or otherwise
enjoys the work or performance so made
available. However, communication through
satellite or cable or any other means of
simultaneous communication to more than one
household or place of residence including
residential rooms of any hotel or hostel shall be
deemed to be communication to the public.
Sound recording means a recording of sounds
from which such sounds may be produced
regardless of the medium on which such
recording is made or the method by which the
sounds are produced.
Author means,-
(i) in relation to a literary or dramatic work, the
author of the work;
(ii) in relation to a musical work, the composer;
(iii) in relation to an artistic work other than a
photograph, the artist;
(iv) in relation to a photograph, the person taking
the photograph;
(v) in relation to a cinematograph or sound
recording the producer; and
(vi) in relation to any literary, dramatic, musical
or artistic work which is computer-generated, the
person who causes the work to be created;
Works in which Copyright Subsists
Section 13(1) of the Act provides that copyright
shall subsist throughout India in the following
classes of works, that is to say,-
(a) original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic
works;
                                                        (c) sound
(b) cinematograph films; and                            recording.
Section 13 (2) states that copyright shall not
subsist in any work specified in sub-section (1),
other than a work to which the provisions of
Section 40 (deals with power to extend copyright
to foreign works) or section 41 (deals with
provisions as to works of certain international
organisations) apply, unless-
(i) in the case of a published work, the work is
first published in India, or where the work is first
published outside India, the author is at the date
of such publication, or in a case where the
author was dead at that date, was at the time of
his death, a citizen of India;
(ii) in the case of an unpublished work other than
a work of architecture , the author is at the date
of making of the work a citizen of India or
domiciled in India; and
(iii) in the case of a work of architecture the work
is located in India.
It may be noted that in the case of a work of joint
authorship, the conditions conferring copyright
specified in this sub-section shall be satisfied by
all the authors of the work.
According to Section 13 (3) Copyright shall not
subsist-
(a) in any cinematograph film if a substantial part
of the film is an infringement of the copyright in
any other work;
(b) in any sound recording made in respect of a
literary, dramatic or musical work, if in making
the sound recording, copyright in such work has
been infringed.
The copyright in a cinematograph film or a record
shall not affect the separate copyright in any
work in respect of which or a substantial part of
which, the film, or, as the case may be, the
sound recording is made.
In the case of a work of architecture, copyright
shall subsist only in the artistic character and
design and shall not extend to processes or
methods of construction.
                                                     a literary,
                                                     dramatic,
                                                     musical or
It may be noted that 'work' means any of the         artistic work; a cinematograph a sound
following works, namely: ?                           ?              film; ?         recording.
MEANINg OF COPYRIgHT
Copyright is an intellectual property right that law
gives to a creator of literary, dramatic, musical,
and artistic work and a producer of
cinematograph films and sound recordings. It
also applies to architectural works and computer
program/software. It can be understood as a
bundle of rights that include the right of
reproduction, communication, adaptation, and
translation of the work. Copyright ensures
protection to the rights of authors over their
creations and in turn aims at rewarding
creativity.
Section 14 of the Act defines the term Copyright
as to mean the exclusive right to do or authorise
the doing of the following acts in respect of a
work or any substantial part thereof, namely:
(a) Copyright in the case of a Literary, Dramatic
or Musical Work, not being a Computer
Programme

(i)
(ii)
to reproduce the work in any material form
including the storing of it in any medium by
electronic means; to issue copies of the work to
the public not being copies already in circulation;


(iii)
to perform the work in public, or communicate it
to the public;


(iv)
to make any cinematograph film or sound
recording in respect of the work;


(v)
to make any translation of the work;


(vi)
to make any adaptation of the work;


(vii)
to do, in relation to a translation or an adaptation
of the work, any of the acts specified in relation
to the work in sub-clauses (i) to (vi).
(b) Copyright in the case of a Computer
Programme

(i)
to do any of the acts specified in specified in
respect of a literary, dramatic or musical work;


(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer
for sale or for commercial rental any copy of the
computer programmer:
Provided that such commercial rental does not
apply in respect of computer programmes where
the programme itself is not the essential object
of the rental.
(c) Copyright in the case of an Artistic Work

To reproduce the work in any material form
including-
(A) the storing of it in any medium by electronic
or other means; or
(B) depiction in three-dimensions of a two-
dimensional work; or
(C) depiction in two-dimensions of a three-
dimensional work.
(d) Copyright in the case of a Cinematograph
Film

(i)
to make a copy of the film, including-
(A) a photograph of any image forming part
thereof; or
(B) storing of it in any medium by electronic or
other means.


(ii)
to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for
sale or for such rental, any copy of the film.


(iii)
to communicate the film to the public.
(e) Copyright in the case of a
Sound Recording


(i)
to make any other sound recording embodying it
including storing of it in any medium by
electronic or other means;


(ii)
to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for
sale or for such rental, any copy of the sound
recording;


(iii) to communicate the sound recording to the
public.
It may be noted that a copy which has been sold
once shall be deemed to be a copy already in
circulation.
It may be noted that "commercial rental" does
not include the rental, lease or lending of a
lawfully acquired copy of a computer
programme, sound recording, visual recording or
cinematograph film for non-profit purposes by a
non-profit library or non-profit educational
institution.
However, a "non-profit library or nonprofit
educational institution" means a library or
educational institution which receives grants
from the Government or exempted from payment
of tax under the Income-Tax Act, 1961.
In the case of Gramophone Company of India
Ltd. vs. Super Cassette Industries Ltd. R.A.J.
433: 2010 (44) PTC 541 (Del) - Infringement of
original literary, dramatic and musical works.
Whether action of the Defendant in using its
sound recording to produce a cinematograph film
constitutes infringement of the Plaintiffs
copyright in the original literary, dramatic and
musical works. Copyright conferred on the owner
of a copyright in a sound recording by virtue of
Section 14(e) does not specifically include the
right to make a cinematograph film embodying
the sound recording. It gives the owner exclusive
right to make any other sound recording
embodying it. Right to utilise the literary,
dramatic or musical work to make a
cinematograph film is specifically conferred on
the owner of the copyright in the literary,
dramatic or musical work by virtue of Section
14(a)(iv) of the Act. Without the specific
permission of the owners of the copyright in the
musical, dramatic, or literary works from which
the sound recording was made, the owner of the
copyright in a sound recording cannot proceed
with incorporating the sound recording or version
recording in a cinematograph film.
TERM OF COPYRIgHT
Copyright ensures certain minimum safeguards
of the rights of authors over their creations,
thereby protecting and rewarding creativity.
Creativity being the keystone of progress, no
civilized society can afford to ignore the basic
requirement of encouraging the same. Economic
and social development of a society is
dependent on creativity. The protection provided
by copyright to the efforts of writers, artists,
designers, dramatists, musicians, architects and
producers of sound recordings, cinematograph
films and computer software, creates an
atmosphere conducive to creativity, which
induces them to create more and motivates
others to create.

Sections 22-29 deal with Term of Copyright in
respect of Published Literary, Dramatic, Musical
and Artistic Works; Anonymous and
Pseudonymous; Posthumous, Photographs,
Cinematograph Films, Sound Recording,
Government Works, Works of PSUs and Works
of International Organisations.
Term of Copyright

Number of Years
Term of Copyright in Published
Literary, Dramatic, Musical and Artistic Works

Copyright shall subsist in any literary, dramatic,
musical or artistic work published within the
lifetime of the author until sixty years from the
beginning of the calendar year next following the
year in which the author dies.
In the case of a work of joint authorship, be
construed as a reference to the author who dies
last.
Term of Copyright in Anonymous and
Pseudonymous Works
In the case of literary, dramatic, musical or
artistic work (other than a photograph), which is
published anonymously or pseudonymously,
copyright shall subsist until sixty years from the
beginning of the calendar year next following the
year in which the work is first published.
Provided that where the identity of the author is
disclosed before the expiry of the said period,
copyright shall subsist until sixty years from the
beginning of the calendar year next following the
year in which the author dies.
Term of Copyright in Posthumous Work

In the case of a literary, dramatic or musical work
or an engraving, in which copyright subsists at
the date of the death of the author or, in the
case of any such work of joint authorship, at or
immediately before the date of the death of the
author who dies last, but which, or any
adaptation of which, has not been published
before that date, copyright shall subsist until sixty
years from the beginning of the calendar year
next following the year in which the work is first
published or, where an adaptation of the work is
published in any earlier year, from the beginning
of the calendar year next following that year.
A literary, dramatic or musical work or an
adaptation of any such work shall be deemed to
have been published, if it has been performed in
public or if any sound recordings made in
respect of the work have been sold to the public
or have been offered for sale to the public.
Term of Copyright in Cinematograph Films

In the case of a cinematograph film, copyright
shall subsists until sixty years from the beginning
of the calendar year next following the year in
which the film is published.
Term of Copyright in Sound Recording

In the case a sound recording copyright shall
subsist until sixty years from the beginning of the
calendar year next following the year in which the
sound recording is published.
Term of Copyright government Works

In the case of Government work, where
Government is the first owner of the copyright
therein, copyright shall subsist until sixty years
from the beginning of the calendar year next
following the year in which the work is first
published.
Term of Copyright in Works Of Public
Undertakings

In the case of a work, where a public undertaking
is the first owner of the copyright therein,
copyright shall subsist until sixty years from the
beginning of the calendar year next following the
year in which the work is first published.
Term of Copyright in Works of International
Organizations

In the case of a work of an international
organisation to which the provisions of section
41 apply, copyright shall subsist until sixty years
from the beginning of the calendar year next
following the year in which the work is first
published.
It may be noted that:
The (c) symbol stands for copyright.
ASSIgNMENT OF COPYRIgHT
Section 18 of the Copyright Act provides that the
owner of the copyright in an existing work or the
prospective owner of the copyright in a future
work may assign to any person the copyright
either wholly or partially and either generally or
subject to limitations and either for the whole
term of the copyright or any part thereof.
However, in case of the assignment of copyright
in any future work, the assignment shall take
effect only when the work comes into existence.
No such assignment shall be applied to any
medium or mode of exploitation of the work
which did not exist or was not in commercial use
at the time when the assignment was made,
unless the assignment specifically referred to
such medium or mode of exploitation of the
work.
However, the author of the literary or musical
work included in a cinematograph film shall not
assign or waive the right to receive royalties to
be shared on an equal basis with the assignee
of copyright for the utilization of such work in any
form other than for the communication to the
public of the work along with the cinematograph
film in a cinema hall, except to the legal heirs of
the authors or to a copy right society for
collection and distribution and any agreement to
contrary shall be void.
The author of the literary or musical work
included in the sound recording but not forming
part of any cinematograph film shall not assign or
waive the right to receive royalties to be shared
on an equal basis with the assignee of copyright
for any utilization of such work except to the
legal heirs of the authors or to a collecting
society for collection and distribution and any
assignment to the contrary shall be void. It may
be noted that assignee in respects the
assignment of the copyright in any future work
includes the legal representatives of the
assignee, if the assignee dies before the work
comes into existence.
In Video Master vs. Nishi Production 1998(3)
Bom. CR 782, judgement dated 21 October,
1997, Hon'ble Bombay High Court considered
the issue whether assignment of video rights
would include the right of satellite broadcast as
well. The Court agreed with the defendant's
arguments that there were several public
communication channels, including video TV,
satellite broadcasting, and terrestrial television
broadcasting. The film's owner owned
independent copyright in each of those formats,
and he could assign it to various people. As a
result, the video copyright granted to the plaintiff
would exclude the satellite broadcast copyright
of the film, which was a separate entitlement of
the owner of the film.
Mode of Assignment
Section 19 of the Act provides that an
assignment of the copyright in any work should
be in writing signed by the assignor or by his
duly authorised agent. The assignment of
copyright in any work required to identify such
work, and also specify the rights assigned; the
duration; territorial extent of such assignment;
the amount of royalty and any other
consideration payable to the author or his legal
heirs during the currency of the assignment and
the assignment subject to revision, extension or
termination on terms mutually agreed upon by
the parties.
Where the assignee does not exercise the rights
assigned to him under any of the other sub-
sections of this section within a period of one
year from the date of assignment, the
assignment in respect of such rights shall be
deemed to have lapsed after the expiry of the
said period unless otherwise specified in the
assignment.
The assignment of copyright in any work
contrary to the terms and conditions of the rights
already assigned to a copyright society in which
the author of the work is a member is void. The
Assignment of copyright in any work to make a
cinematograph film does not affect the right of
the author of the work to claim an equal share of
royalties and consideration payable in case of
utilization of the work in any form other than for
the communication to the public of the work,
along with the cinematograph film in a cinema
hall.
In the case of K.A. Venugopala Setty vs. Dr.
Suryakanta V. Kamath 1992 (12) PTC 55 (DB)
(Kar) Assignment setup by the defendant is an
oral assignment. Under the provisions contained
in section 19 of the Act, assignment of copyright
must be in writing and signed by the author or his
duly authorized agent stating in clear terms
about the right proposed to be assigned as well
as the size of the work. Hence, an oral
assignment is invalid and it is impermissible in
law.
The Hon'ble Court ruled that Section 19A of the
Act, which deals with copyright disputes, will only
be applicable when a copyright assignment is
made in compliance with Section 19 of the Act,
which means it is in written and signed by the
assignor or his properly authorised agent.
Therefore, provision 19A cannot be considered
to apply in the current instance and preclude the
lawsuit because there isn't an assignment in
writing as required by section 19 of the Act.
Disputes with respect to Assignment of
Copyright
Section 19A(1) provides that if an assignee fails
to make sufficient exercise of the rights assigned
to him, and such failure is not attributable to any
act or omission of the assignor, then, the
Commercial Court may, on receipt of a complaint
from the assignor and after holding such inquiry
as it may deem necessary, revoke such
assignment.
According to Section 19A(2) If any dispute arises
with respect to the assignment of any copyright,
the Commercial Court may, on receipt of a
complaint from the aggrieved party and after
holding such inquiry as it considers necessary,
pass such order as it may deem fit including an
order for the recovery of any royalty payable:
It may be noted that Commercial Court for the
purposes of any State, means a Commercial
Court constituted under section 3, or the
Commercial Division of a High Court constituted
section 4, of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015.
Provided that the Commercial Court shall not
pass any order under this sub-section to revoke
the assignment unless it is satisfied that the
terms of assignment are harsh to the assignor in
case the assignor is also the author:
Provided further that, pending the disposal of an
application for revocation of assignment under
this subsection, the Commercial Court may pass
such order, as it deems fit regarding
implementation of the terms and conditions of
assignment including any consideration to be
paid for the enjoyment of the rights assigned:-
Provided also that, no order of revocation of
assignment under this sub-section, shall be
made within a period of five years from the date
of such assignment.
Every complaint received under Section 19A(2)
shall be dealt with by the Commercial Court as
far as possible and efforts shall be made to pass
the final order in the matter within a period of six
months from the date of receipt of the complaint
and any delay in compliance of the same, the
Commercial Court shall record the reasons
thereof.
LICENCES
Chapter VI containing Sections 30-32B deal with
licences. Section 30 deals with licences by
owners of copyright; Section 30A contains
provisions regarding application of Sections 19
and 19A; section 31 provides for compulsory
licence in works withheld from public; Section
31A deals with compulsory licences in
unpublished Indian works; Section 31B deals
with Compulsory Licence for the benefit of
disabled; Section 31C deals with statutory
licence for cover versions; Section 31D deals
with statutory licence for broadcasting of literary
and musical works and sound recording; Section
32 deals with licences to produce and publish
translations; Section 32A provides for licence to
reproduce and publish works for certain
purposes; and Section 32B deals with
termination of licences.
Licences by Owners of Copyright
The author or the copyright owner has exclusive
rights in his creative work and he alone has right
to grant license with respect to such work.
Section 30 of the Act empowers the owner of the
copyright in any existing work or the prospective
owner of the copyright in any future work to grant
any interest in the right by licence in writing by
him or by his duly authorised agent. However, in
the case of a licence relating to copyright in any
future work, the licence shall take effect only
when the work comes into existence.
Explanation to this section clarifies that where a
person to whom a licence relating to copyright in
any future work is granted, dies before the work
comes into existence, his legal representatives
shall, in the absence of any provision to the
contrary in the licence, be entitled to the benefit
of the licence.
Compulsory Licence in Works withheld From
Public
According to Section 31 of the Act, if at any time
during the term of copyright in any work] which
has been published or performed in public, a
complaint is made to the Commercial Court that
the owner of copyright in the work-
(a) has refused to republish or allow the
republication of the work or has refused to allow
the performance in public of the work, and by
reason of such refusal the work is withheld from
the public; or
(b) has refused to allow communication to the
public by broadcast of such work or in the case
of a sound recording the work recorded in such
sound recording, on terms which the
complainant considers reasonable;
the Commercial Court, after giving to the owner
of the copyright in the work a reasonable
opportunity of being heard and after holding such
inquiry as it may deem necessary, may, if it is
satisfied that the grounds for such refusal are not
reasonable, direct the Registrar of Copyrights to
grant to the complainant a licence to republish
the work, perform the work in public or
communicate the work to the public by
broadcast, as the case may be, subject to
payment to the owner of the copyright of such
compensation and subject to such other terms
and conditions as the Commercial Court may
determine; and thereupon the Registrar of
Copyrights shall grant the licence to such person
or persons who, in the opinion of the Commercial
Court, is or are qualified to do so in accordance
with the directions of the Commercial Court, on
payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
Compulsory Licence in Unpublished or
Published Works
Section 31A provides that where, in the case of
any unpublished work or any work published or
communicated to the public and the work is
withheld from the public in India, the author is
dead or unknown or cannot be traced, or the
owner of the copyright in such work cannot be
found, any person may apply to the Commercial
Court for a licence to publish or communicate to
the public such work or a translation thereof in
any language.

Before making an application, the applicant shall
publish his proposal in one issue of a daily
newspaper in the English language having
circulation in the major part of the country and
where the application is for the publication of a
translation in any language, also in one issue of
any daily newspaper in that language.
Every such application shall be made in such
form as may be prescribed and shall be
accompanied with a copy of the advertisement
issued above and such fee as may be
prescribed.
Where an application is made to the Commercial
Court under this section, it may after holding
such inquiry as may be prescribed, direct the
Registrar of Copyrights to grant to the applicant
a licence to publish the work or a translation
thereof in the language mentioned in the
application subject to the payment of such
royalty and subject to such other terms and
conditions as the Commercial Court may
determine, and thereupon the Registrar of
Copyrights shall grant the licence to the
applicant in accordance with the direction of the
Commercial Court.
Where a licence is granted under this section,
the Registrar of Copyrights may, by order, direct
the applicant to deposit the amount of the royalty
determined by the Commercial Court in the
public account of India or in any other account
specified by the Commercial Court so as to
enable the owner of the copyright or, as the case
may be, his heirs, executors or the legal
representatives to claim such royalty at any time.
If the original author is dead, the Central
Government may, if it considers that the
publication of the work is desirable in the
national interest, require the heirs, executors or
legal representatives of the author to publish
such work within such period as may be
specified by it.
Where any work is not published within the
period specified by the Central Government
Commercial Court may, on an application made
by any person for permission to publish the work
and after hearing the parties concerned, permit
such publication on payment of such royalty as
the Commercial Court may, in the circumstances
of such case, determine in the prescribed
manner.
Statutory Licence for broadcasting of Literary
and Musical Works and Sound Recording
According to Section 31D of the Act, any
broadcasting organisation desirous of
communicating to the public by way of a
broadcast or by way of performance of a literary
or musical work and sound recording which has
already been published may do so, subject to the
provisions of this section.
The broadcasting organisation shall give prior
notice, in such manner as may be prescribed, of
its intention to broadcast the work stating the
duration and territorial coverage of the
broadcast, and shall pay to the owner of rights in
each work royalties in the manner and at the rate
fixed by the Commercial Court.
The rates of royalties for radio broadcasting shall
be different from television broadcasting and the
Commercial Court shall fix separate rates for
radio broadcasting and television broadcasting.
In fixing the manner and the rate of royalty the
Commercial Court may require the broadcasting
organisation to pay an advance to the owners of
rights.
The names of the authors of the principal
performers of the work shall, except in case of
the broadcasting organisation communicating
such work by way of performance, be
announced with the broadcast.
No fresh alteration to any literary or musical
work, which is not technically necessary for the
purpose of broadcasting, other than shortening
the work for convenience of broadcast, shall be
made without the consent of the owners of
rights.
The broadcasting organisation shall-
(a) maintain such records and books of account,
and render to the owners of rights such reports
and accounts; and
(b) allow the owner of rights or his duly
authorised agent or representative to inspect all
records and books of account relating to such
broadcast, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
Termination of Licence
Section 32B of the Act deals with termination of
licences and provides that if at any time after the
granting of a licence, the owner of the copyright
in the work or any person authorised by him
publishes a translation of such work in the same
language and which is substantially the same in
content at a price reasonably related to the price
normally charged in India for the translation of
works of the same standard on the same or
similar subject, the licence so granted shall be
terminated. However, such termination shall take
effect only after the expiry of a period of three
months from the date of service of a notice in the
prescribed manner on the person holding such
licence by the owner of the right of translation
intimating the publication of the translation.
COPYRIgHT SOCIETY
A copyright society is a registered collective
administration society under Section 33 of the
Copyright Act, 1957. Such a society is formed by
authors and other owners. A copyright society
can issue or grant licences in respect of any
work for which it is authorised to by the authors
or owners of the work.
The Copyright Society is a legal body that
protects or safeguards the interest of the owner
in the product in which copyright subsists.
Copyright societies give assurance to the
creative author of the commercial management
of their works. It can also be described as a
registered collective administration society for
the management and protection of copyright.
Registration of Copyright Society
Section 33(1) prohibits any person or association
of persons to commence or, carry on the
business of issuing or granting licences in
respect of any work in which copyright subsists
on respect or in respect of any other rights
conferred by the Act. However, owner of
copyright in his individual capacity, continue to
have the right to grant licences in respect of his
own works consistent with his obligations as a
member of the registered copyright society. The
business of issuing or granting license in respect
of literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works
incorporated in a cinematograph films or sound
recordings shall be carried out only through a
copyright society duly registered under the Act.
Sub section (3) of Section 33 provides that
Central Government registers association of
persons as a copyright society after taking into
account the following factors:
* in the interests of the authors and other owners
of rights;
* the interest and convenience of the public and
in particular of the groups of persons who are
most likely to seek licences in respect of the
relevant rights; and
* the ability and professional competence of the
applicants.
As per Section 33(3A) registration granted to a
copyright society under sub-section (3)
mentioned above shall be for a period of five
years and may be renewed from time to time
before the end of every five years on a request in
the prescribed form and the Central Government
may renew the registration after considering the
report of Registrar of Copyrights on the working
of the copyright society. However, the renewal of
the registration of a copyright society shall be
subject to the continued collective control of the
copyright society being shared with the authors
of works in their capacity as owners of copyright
or of the right to receive royalty.
Central Government if satisfied that a copyright
society is being managed in a manner
detrimental to the interests of "authors and other
owners of right" concerned, cancel the
registration of such society after such inquiry as
may be prescribed. It also states that the
copyright society duly registered under the act
can only conduct the business of
issuing/granting licenses to the copyrighted work
i.e. literary, dramatic, musical, or artistic works
incorporated in cinematograph films or sound
recordings.
Administration of Rights of Owner by Copyright
Society
Section 34 of the Act empowers a copyright
society to accept exclusive authorisation from an
author and other owners of right to administer
any right in any work by issue of licences or
collection of licence fees or both. Such
authorization can be withdrawn by an author and
other owners of right.
Copyright society is competent to enter into
agreement with any foreign society or
organisation administering rights corresponding
to rights under the Indian Copyright Act to
entrust to such foreign society or organisation
the administration in any foreign country of rights
administered by the said copyright society in
India, or for administering in India the rights
administered in a foreign country by such foreign
society or organisation.
Copyright Society empower to-
(i) issue licences under section 30 in respect of
any rights under this Act;
(ii) collect fees in pursuance of such licences;
(iii) distribute such fees among author and other
owners of right after making deductions for its
own expenses;
(iv) perform any other functions consistent which
the provisions of section 35.
Control Over the Copyright Society by the Author
and Other Owners of Right
As per Section 35 every copyright society is
subject to the collective control of the owners of
rights it administers. It does not includes
administered by a foreign society or
organisation.
Every copyright society shall have a governing
body with such number of persons elected from
among the members of the society consisting of
equal number of authors and owners of work for
the purpose of the administration of the society.
All members of copyrights society shall enjoy
equal membership rights and there shall be no
discrimination between authors and owners of
rights in the distribution of royalties.
RIgHTS OF bROADCASTINg ORgANISATION
AND OF PERFORMERS RIgHTS OF
bROADCASTINg
ORgANISATION AND PERFORMERS
Chapter VIII of the Act containing Section 37-
39A deals with rights of Broadcasting
Organisations and of Performers.
broadcast Reproduction Right
Section 37 entitles every broadcasting
organisation to have a special right to be known
as "broadcast reproduction right" in respect of its
broadcasts.
The Broadcast reproduction right shall subsist
until twenty-five years from the beginning of the
calendar year next following the year in which the
broadcast is made.
A per Section 37(3) during the continuance of a
broadcast reproduction right in relation tothe
broadcast or any substantial part thereof,-
(a) re-broadcasts the broadcast; or
(b) causes the broadcast to be heard or seen by
the public on payment of any charges; or
(c) makes any sound recording or visual
recording of the broadcast; or
(d) makes any reproduction of such sound
recording or visual recording where such initial
recording was done without licence or, where it
was licensed, for any purpose not envisaged by
such licence; or
(e) sells or gives on commercial rental or offer for
sale or for such rental, any such sound recording
or visual recording referred to in clause (c) or
clause (d).
Performer's Right
Section 38 provides that where any performer
appears or engages in any performance, he shall
have a special right to be known as the
"performer's right" in relation to such
performance. The performer's right subsist until
fifty years from the beginning of the calendar
year next following the year in which the
performance is made.
Exclusive Right of Performer
As per section 38A without prejudice to the
rights conferred on authors, the performer's right
which is an exclusive right subject to the
provisions of the Act to do or authorise for doing
any of the following acts in respect of the
performance or any substantial part thereof,
namely:-
(a) to make a sound recording or a visual
recording of the performance, including-
(i) reproduction of it in any material form
including the storing of it in any medium by
electronic or any other means;
(ii) issuance of copies of it to the public not being
copies already in circulation;
(iii) communication of it to the public;
(iv) selling or giving it on commercial rental or
offer for sale or for commercial rental any copy
of the recording;
(b) to broadcast or communicate the
performance to the public except where the
performance is already broadcast.
It may be noted that once a performer has, by
written agreement, consented to the
incorporation of his performance in a
cinematograph film he shall not, in the absence
of any contract to the contrary, object to the
enjoyment by the producer of the film of the
performer's right in the same film. However, the
performer shall be entitled for royalties in case of
making of the performances for commercial use.
Moral Right of Performer
Section 38B of Act provides that the performer of
a performance shall, independently of his right
after assignment, either wholly or partially of his
right, have the right to claim to be identified as
the performer of his performance except where
omission is dictated by the manner of the use of
the performance; and to restrain or claim
damages in respect of any distortion, mutilation
or other modification of his performance that
would be prejudicial to his reputation.
What are the Moral Rights of an Author?
The author of a work has the right to claim
authorship of the work and to restrain or claim
damages in respect of any distortion, mutilation,
modification or other acts in relation to the said
work which is done before the expiration of the
term of copyright if such distortion, mutilation,
modification or other act would be prejudicial to
his honour or reputation. Moral rights are
available to the authors even after the economic
rights are assigned.
Copyright Protection to Foreign Works
The Copyright Act applies only to works first
published in India, irrespective of the nationality
of the author. However Section 40 of the Act
empowers the Government of India to extend
the benefits of all or any of the provisions of the
Act to works first published in any foreign
country. The benefits granted to foreign works
will not extend beyond what is available to the
works in the home country and that too on a
reciprocal basis i.e. the foreign country must
grant similar protection to works entitled to
copyright under the Act.
The International Copyright Order, 1999 [S.O.
228(E), dated 24th March 1999, published in the
gazette of India, Extra Pt II, Sec. 3 (i), dated 6th
April 1999]
In exercise of the powers conferred by section
40 of the Copyright Act, 1957 and in
supersession of the International Copyright
Order, 1991, the Central Government hereby
makes the following Order, namely the
International Copyright Order, 1999.
2. In International Copyright Order, 1999, unless
the context otherwise requires:-
(a) "Berne Convention Country" means a country
which is a member of the Berne Copyright Union,
and includes a country mentioned either in Part I
or in Part II of the Schedule;
(b) "Phonogram" means an exclusively aural
fixation of a performance or other sounds;
(c) "Phonograms Convention Country" means a
country which has either ratified, or accepted, or
acceded to the Convention for the Protection of
Producers of Phonograms against Unauthorised
Duplication of their Phonograms, done at
Geneva on the Twenty ninth day of October,
one; thousand nine hundred and seventy-one,
and includes a country mentioned in Part V of
the Schedule;
(d) "Schedule" means the Schedule appended to
this Order;
(e) "Universal Copyright Convention Country"
means a country which has either ratified, or
accepted, or acceded to the Universal Copyright
Convention, and includes a country mentioned
either in Part III or in Part IV of the Schedule;
(f) "World Trade Organisation Country" means a
country which is a member of the World Trade
Organisation and which has either ratified, or
accepted, or acceded to the Agreement on
Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Right, 1994 and includes a country mentioned in
Part VI of the Schedule.
3. Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 4, 5
and 6, all the provisions of the Copyright Act,
1957 except those in Chapter VIII, and those
other provisions which apply exclusively to
Indian works, shall apply :-
(a) to any work first made or published in a
country mentioned in Part I, II, III, IV or VI of the
Schedule, in like manner as if it was first
published in India;
(b) to any work first made or published in a
country other than a country mentioned in Part I,
II, III, IV or VI of the Schedule, the author of
which was, at the date of such publication, or,
where the author was dead

on that date, he was at the time of his death, a
national of a country mentioned in Part I, II, 111,
IV and VI of the Schedule, in like manner, as if
the author was a citizen of Indian at that point of
time;
(c) to an unpublished work, the author whereof
was, at the time of the making or publication of
the work, a national or domiciled in any country
mentioned in Part I, II, 111, IV and VI of the
Schedule, in like manner, as if the author was a
citizen of, domiciled in, India;
(d) to any work first made or published by a body
corporate incorporated under any law of a
country mentioned in Part I, II, 111, IV or Part VI
of the Schedule, in like manner, as if it was
incorporated under a law in force in India; and
(e) to a sound recording first made, the producer
of which was, at the date of such production, a
national of a country mentioned in Part V or Part
VI of the Schedule or a body corporate
incorporated under a law in force in such a
country, in like manner as if the producer was
the citizen of India or a body corporate
incorporated under a law in force in India, as the
case may be, at that point of time.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in
paragraph 3, the provisions of Chapter VIII of the
Act shall apply to a Broadcasting Organisation
and a Performer in a World Trade Organisation
Country mentioned in Part VI of the Schedule.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(a) of paragraph 3 and paragraph 4 of the
provisions of sub-section (1) of section 32 of the
Act-
(i) shall not apply to a work first made or
published in any Berne Convention Country
mentioned in Part I and Part II of the Schedule.
(ii) shall not apply to a work first made or
published in any World Trade Organisation
Country mentioned in Part VI of the Schedule.
(iii) shall apply to a work first made or published
in any Universal Copyright Convention Country
mentioned in Part III or Part IV of the Schedule.
Only in respect of the translation of such work
into any language specified in the Eighth
Schedule to the Constitution of India.
6. The provisions of section 32 (excluding its sub
section (1) 32A and 32B shall apply to a work
first made or published in a Berne Convention
Country mentioned in Part I of the Schedule or in
a Universal Copyright Convention Country
mentioned in Part III of the Schedule or in a
World Trade Organisation Country mentioned in
Part VI of the Schedule.
7. The term of copyright in a work shall not
exceed that which is enjoyed by it in its country
of origin.
Explanation- In this paragraph, "the country of
origin" shall mean-
(a) in the case of a work first made or published
in a Berne Convention Country or in a Universal
Copyright Convention Country or a World Trade
Organisation Country, that country;
(b) in the case of a work made or published
simultaneously either in a Berne Convention
Country or a Universal Copyright Convention
Country or in a World Trade Organisation
Country and in a country which is neither a Berne
Convention Country nor a World Trade
Organisation Country, the former country;
(c) in the case of a work which is made or
published simultaneously in several Berne
Convention Countries, the country whose laws
grant the shortest term of copyright to such a
work';
(d) in the case of a work which is made or
published simultaneously in several Universal
Copyright Convention Countries, the country
whose laws grant the shortest term of copyright
to such a work;

(e) in the case of a work which is made or
published simultaneously in several World Trade
Organisation Countries, the country whose laws
grant the shortest term of copyright to such a
work;
(f) in the case of an unpublished work or a work
first made or published in a country other than a
Berne Convention Country or a Universal
Copyright Convention Country or a World Trade
Organisation Country, the country of which the
author was a citizen, or the country in which he
was domiciled at the time of its first publication,
whichever grants the longer term of copyright.
REgISTRATION OF COPYRIgHT
Chapter X of the Copyright Act containing
Sections 44- 50A deals with various aspects of
registration of copyright.
The mechanism of registration of copyright has
been contemplated under Section 44 of the Act.
It is evident from the provisions of the aforesaid
section that registration of the work under the
Copyright Act is not compulsory and is not a
condition precedent for maintaining a suit for
damages, if somebody infringes the copyright.
Sections 44 and 45 of the Copyright Act are only
enabling provisions and do not affect the
common law right to sue for infringement of
copyright. An action for infringement can be
brought even if the registration has not been
done. The only effect of registration is that it is
the prima facie evidence of the particulars
entered in the register.
Section 45 of the Act clearly mentions that the
author or publisher of, or the owner of or other
person interested in the Copyright in, any Work
may make an application in the prescribed form
accompanied by the prescribed fee to the
registrar of Copyrights. The use of word "may"
clearly indicate that the author is at the
discretionary liberty to apply for registration of
Copyrights.
An artistic work which is used or is capable of
being used in relation to any goods or services,
the application shall include a statement to that
effect and shall be accompanied by a certificate
from the Registrar of Trade Marks referred to in
section 3 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 to the
effect that no trade mark identical with or
deceptively similar to such artistic work has been
registered under that Act in the name of, or that
no application has been made under that Act for
such registration by, any person other than the
applicant.
On receipt of an application in respect of any
work, the Registrar of Copyrights may, after
holding such inquiry as he may deem fit, enter
the particulars of the work in the Register of
Copyrights.
Registrar of Copyrights Possess Certain Powers
of Civil Courts
The Register of Copyrights is to be maintained
by the Copyright Office to enter the names or
titles of works and the names and addresses of
authors, publishers and owners of copyright.
The Registrar of Copyrights shall have the
powers of a civil court when trying a suit under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of
the following matters, namely, -
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of
any person and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any
document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
                                                        (e)
                                                        requisitioning
                                                        any public
                                                        record or
                                                        copy thereof (f) any other
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of          from any        matter which may
witnesses or documents;                                 court or office;be prescribed.
In Sanjay Soya Private Ltd. vs. Narayani Trading
Company IA (L) 5011/2020 in COMP (L) 2/2020
the Bombay High Court ruled that no section of
the Act requires registration of copyright before
requesting relief under the Act. Instead, it is up
to the owner's choice whether to register
copyright under the Act. The Convention and the
TRIPS Agreement were also cited by the court to
buttress its ruling. Registration just establishes a
presumption of validity for information placed in
the Copyright register. The word "may" is used in
Section 45(1) of the Act, which deals with entries
in the register of copyrights, and Section 51
states that infringement is not limited to the
registered Work. Protection should be
"automatic" as soon as the Work is created.
The Procedure for Registration
The Copyright Office has been set up to provide
registration facilities to all types of works and is
headed by a Registrar of Copyrights. The
applications are also accepted by post. On-line
registration through "E-filing facility "has also
been provided which facilitates the applicants to
file applications at the time and place chosen by
them.
Chapter XIII of the Copyright Rules, 2013, as
amended, sets out the procedure for the
registration of a work.
The procedure for registration is as follows:
> Application for registration is to be made on
specified Form (Including Statement of
Particulars and Statement of Further Particulars);
> Separate applications should be made for
registration of each work;
> Each application should be accompanied by
the requisite fee prescribed in the second
schedule to the Rules;
> The applications should be signed by the
applicant. The Power of Attorney signed by the
party and accepted by the advocate should also
be enclosed, if applicable;
> The fee is to be paid either in the form of
Demand Draft or Indian Postal Order or through
E payment Each and every column of the
Statement of Particulars and Statement of
Further Particulars should be replied specifically.
Copyright Registration Workflow

Source: https:
//copyright.gov.in/frmWorkFlow.aspx
INFRINgEMENT OF COPYRIgHT
Copyright infringement refers to the
unauthorized use of someone's copyrighted
work. Thus, it is the use of someone's
copyrighted work without permission thereby
infringing certain rights of the copyright holder,
such as the right to reproduce, distribute, display
or perform the protected work. Copyright
protection gives exclusive rights to the owners of
the work to reproduce the work enabling them to
derive financial benefits by exercising such
rights. If any person without authorisation from
the owner exercises these rights in respect of
the work which has copyright protection it
constitutes an infringement of the copyright. If
the reproduction of the work is carried out after
the expiry of the copyright term it will not amount
to an infringement.
Section 51(a) of the Act contemplates situation
in which a copyright shall be deemed to be
infringed. This Section says that a copyright is
infringed when any person without a licence
granted by the owner of the copyright or the
Registrar of Copyright or in contravention of the
conditions of a licence so granted or of any
condition imposed by a competent authority:

(i) does anything, the exclusive right to do which
is by this Act conferred upon the owner of the
copyright, or
(ii) permits for profit any place to be used for the
communication of the work to the public where
such communication constitutes an infringement
of the copyright in the work, unless he was not
aware and had no reasonable ground for
believing that such communication to the public
would be an infringement of copyright; or
Section 51(b) when any person (i) makes for
sale or hire, or sells or lets for hire, or by way of
trade displays or offers for sale or hire, or (ii)
distributes either for the purpose of trade or to
such an extent as to affect prejudicially the
owner of the copyright, or (iii) by way of trade
exhibits in public, or (iv) imports into India, any
infringing copies of the work.
It may be noted that Section 51(b) (iv) i.e.,
imports into India shall apply to the import of one
copy of any work for the private and domestic
use of the importer.
Explanation: For the purposes of section 51, the
reproduction of a literary, dramatic, musical or
artistic work in the form of a cinematograph film
shall be deemed to be an "infringing copy".
It may be noted that "Infringing copy" means,-
(i) in relation to a literary, dramatic, musical or
artistic work, a reproduction thereof otherwise
than in the form of a cinematographic film;
(ii) in relation to a cinematographic film, a copy
of the film made on any medium by any means;
(iii) in relation to a sound recording, any other
recording embodying the same sound recording,
made by any means;
(iv) in relation to a programme or performance in
which such a broadcast reproduction right or a
performer's right subsists under the provisions of
this Act, the sound recording or a
cinematographic film of such programme or
performance, if such reproduction, copy or
sound recording is made or imported in
contravention of the provisions of this Act.
Which are the Common Copyright
Infringements?
The following are some of the commonly known
acts involving infringement of copyright:
? Making infringing copies for sale or hire or
selling or letting them for hire;
? Permitting any place for the performance of
works in public where such performance
constitutes infringement of copyright;
? Distributing infringing copies for the purpose of
trade or to such an extent so as to affect
prejudicially the interest of the owner of
copyright;
? Public exhibition of infringing copies by way of
trade; and > Importation of infringing copies into
India.
In the case of S.K. Dutt vs. Law Book Co. AIR
1954 All 570, the Hon'ble Court held that in
infringement of copyright the onus of proof is on
plaintiff to satisfy the court that the defendant
had infringed his copyright. The plaintiff having
failed to establish any infringement of his
copyright, no question of granting any relief to
the plaintiff could arise. It may here be noted,
however, that there was on behalf of the plaintiff,
no evidence to indicate what damage, if any,
accrued to him, assuming that there was an
infringement of his copyright by the defendants.
Statutory Exceptions-Certain acts not to be
Infringement of Copyright
Certain exceptions to infringement have been
stipulated by the Copyright Act. The object of
these exceptions is to enable the reproduction of
the work for certain public purposes, and for
encouragement of private study, research and
promotion of education. The list of acts which do
not constitute infringement of copyright has been
provided under Section 52 of the Act. These
includes:
                                                   ? private or
                                                   personal use,
(i) A fair dealing with any work, not being a      including
computer programme, for the purposes of-           research;
* criticism or review, whether of that work or of
any other work;
* reporting of current events and current affairs,
including the reporting of a lecture delivered in
public.
It may be noted that storing of any work in any
electronic medium including the incidental
storage of any computer programme which is not
itself an infringing copy for the said purposes,
shall not constitute infringement of copyright.
(ii) The making of copies or adaptation of a
computer programme by the lawful possessor of
a copy of such computer programme, from such
copy in order to utilise the computer programme
for the purposes for which it was supplied; or to
make back-up copies purely as a temporary
protection against loss, destruction or damage in
order only to utilise the computer programme for
the purpose for which it was supplied.
(iii) the doing of any act necessary to obtain
information essential for operating inter-
operability of an independently created computer
programme with other programmes by a lawful
possessor of a computer programme provided
that such information is not otherwise readily
available.
(iv) the observation, study or test of functioning
of the computer programme in order to
determine the ideas and principles which
underline any elements of the programme while
performing such acts necessary for the functions
for which the computer programme was
supplied.
(v) the making of copies or adaptation of the
computer programme from a personally legally
obtained copy for non-commercial personal use.
(vi) the transient or incidental storage of a work
or performance purely in the technical process of
electronic transmission or communication to the
public.
(vii) transient or incidental storage of a work or
performance for the purpose of providing
electronic links, access or integration, where
such links, access or integration has not been
expressly prohibited by the right holder, unless
the person responsible is aware or has
reasonable grounds for believing that such
storage is of an infringing copy.
It may be noted that if the person responsible for
the storage of the copy has received a written
complaint from the owner of copyright in the
work, complaining that such transient or
incidental storage is an infringement, such
person responsible for the storage shall refrain
from facilitating such access
for a period of twenty-one days or till he receives
an order from the competent court refraining
from facilitating access and in case no such
order is received before the expiry of such
period of twenty-one days, he may continue to
provide the facility of such access.
(viii) the reproduction of any work for the purpose
of a judicial proceeding or for the purpose of a
report of a judicial proceeding.
(ix) the reproduction or publication of any work
prepared by the Secretariat of a Legislature or,
where the Legislature consists of two Houses, by
the Secretariat of either House of the
Legislature, exclusively for the use of the
members of that Legislature.
(x) the reproduction of any work in a certified
copy made or supplied in accordance with any
law for the time being in force.
(xi) the reading or recitation in public of
reasonable extracts from a published literacy or
dramatic work.
(xii) the publication in a collection, mainly
composed of non-copyright matter, bona fide
intended for instructional use, and so described
in the title and in any advertisement issued by or
on behalf of the publisher, of short passages
from published literary or dramatic works, not
themselves published for such use in which
copyright subsists. However, not more than two
such passages from works by the same author
are published by the same publisher during any
period of five years.
In the case of a work of joint authorship,
references in this clause to passages from works
shall include references to passages from works
by any one or more of the authors of those
passages or by any one or more of those authors
in collaboration with any other person.
(xiii) the reproduction of any work-
                                                    ? as part of
                                                    the questions
                                                    to be
                                                    answered in
                                                    an
* by a teacher or a pupil in the course of          examination; ? in answers to
instruction; or                                     or             such questions.
(xiv) the performance, in the course of the
activities of an educational institution, of a
literary, dramatic or musical work by the staff and
students of the institution, or of a cinematograph
film or a sound recording if the audience is
limited to such staff and students, the parents
and guardians of the students and persons
connected with the activities of the institution or
the communication to such an audience of a
cinematograph film or sound recording.
(xv) the causing of a recording to be heard in
public by utilising it,-
* in an enclosed room or hall meant for the
common use of residents in any residential
premises (not being a hotel or similar
commercial establishment) as part of the
amenities provided exclusively or mainly for
residents therein; or
* as part of the activities of a club or similar
organisation which is not established or
conducted for profit;
* as part of the activities of a club, society or
other organisation which is not established or
conducted for profit.
(xvi) the performance of a literary, dramatic or
musical work by an amateur club or society, if
the performance is given to a non-paying
audience, or for the benefit of a religious
institution.
(xvii) the reproduction in a newspaper, magazine
or other periodical of an article on current
economic, political, social or religious topics,
unless the author of such article has expressly
reserved to himself the right of such
reproduction.
(xviii) the storing of a work in any medium by
electronic means by a noncommercial public
library, for preservation if the library already
possesses a non-digital copy of the work.
(xix) the making of not more than three copies of
a book (including a pamphlet, sheet of music,
map, chart or plan) by or under the direction of
the person in charge of a non-commercial public
library for the use of the library if such book is
not available for sale in India.
(xx) the reproduction, for the purpose of
research or private study or with a view to
publication, of an unpublished literary, dramatic
or musical work kept in a library, museum or
other institution to which the public has access.
However, where the identity of the author of any
such work or, in the case of a work of joint
authorship, of any of the authors is known to the
library, museum or other institution, as the case
may be, the provisions of this clause shall apply
only if such reproduction is made at a time more
than sixty years from the date of the death of the
author or, in the case of a work of joint
authorship, from the death of the author whose
identity is known or, if the identity of more
authors than one is known from the death of
such of those authors who dies last. (xxi) the
reproduction or publication of-
                                                    ? any Act of a
                                                    Legislature
                                                    subject to the
                                                    condition that
                                                    such Act is
                                                    reproduced or
                                                    published
                                                    together with
                                                    any
                                                    commentary
                                                    thereon or
                                                    any other
* any matter which has been published in any        original
Official Gazette except an Act of a Legislature; matter;
* the report of any committee, commission,
council, board or other like body appointed by
the Government if such report has been laid on
the Table of the Legislature, unless the
reproduction or publication of such report is
prohibited by the Government;
* any judgement or order of a court, tribunal or
other judicial authority, unless the reproduction
or publication of such judgment or order is
prohibited by the court, the tribunal or other
judicial authority, as the case may be.
(xxii) the production or publication of a
translation in any Indian language of an Act of a
Legislature and of any rules or orders made
thereunder-
* if no translation of such Act or rules or orders in
that language has previously been produced or
published by the Government; or
* where a translation of such Act or rules or
orders in that language has been produced or
published by the Government, if the translation is
not available for sale to the public;
* however, such translation contains a statement
at a prominent place to the effect that the
translation has not been authorised or accepted
as authentic by the Government.
(xxiii) the making or publishing of a painting,
drawing, engraving or photograph of a work of
architecture or the display of a work of
architecture.
(xxiv) the making or publishing of a painting,
drawing, engraving or photograph of a sculpture,
or other artistic work failing under sub-clause (iii)
of clause (c) of section 2, if such work is
permanently situate in a public place or any
premises to which the public has access.
(xxv) the inclusion in a cinematograph film of-
* any artistic work permanently situate in a public
place or any premises to which the public has
access; or
* any other artistic work, if such inclusion is only
by way of background or is otherwise incidental
to the principal matters represented in the film.
(xxvi) the use by the author of an artistic work,
where the author of such work is not the owner
of the copyright therein, of any mould, cast,
sketch, plan, model or study made by him for the
purpose of the work. However, he does not
thereby repeat or imitate the main design of the
work.
(xxvii) the making of a three-dimensional object
from a two-dimensional artistic work, such as a
technical drawing, for the purposes of industrial
application of any purely functional part of a
useful device.
( xxviii) the reconstruction of a building or
structure in accordance with the architectural
drawings or plans by reference to which the
building or structure was originally constructed .
However, the original construction was made
with the consent or licence of the owner of the
copyright in such drawings and plans.
(xxix) in relation to a literary, "dramatic, artistic
or" musical work recorded or reproduced in any
cinematograph film the exhibition of such film
after the expiration of the term of copyright
therein .However, the provisions of sub-clause
(ii) of clause (a), sub-clause (a) of clause (b) and
clauses (d), (f), (g), (m) and (p) shall not apply as
respects any act unless that act is accompanied
by an acknowledgment-
                                                                      ? unless the work
                                                                      is anonymous or
                                                                      the author of the
                                                                      work has
                                                                      previously agreed
                                                        ? identifying or required that no
                                                        the work by acknowledgement
                                                        its title or  of his name
                                                        other         should be made,
                                                        description; also identifying the
                                                        and           author.
(xxx) the making of an ephemeral recording, by a
broadcasting organisation using its own facilities
for its own broadcast by a broadcasting
organisation of a work which it has the right to
broadcast; and the retention of such recording
for archival purposes on the ground of its
exceptional documentary character.
(xxxi) the performance of a literary, dramatic or
musical work or the communication to the public
of such work or of a sound recording in the
course of any bona fide religious ceremony or an
official ceremony held by the Central
Government or the State Government or any
local authority. However, religious ceremony
including a marriage procession and other social
festivities associated with a marriage.
(xxxii) the adaptation, reproduction, issue of
copies or communication to the public of any
work in any accessible format by any person to
facilitate persons with disability to access to
works including sharing with any person with
disability of such accessible format for private or
personal use, educational purpose or research;
or any organisation working for the benefit of the
persons with disabilities in case the normal
format prevents the enjoyment of such works by
such persons. However, the copies of the works
in such accessible format are made available to
the persons with disabilities on a non-profit basis
but to recover only the cost of production and
the organization shall ensure that the copies of
works in such accessible format are used only
by persons with disabilities and takes reasonable
steps to prevent its entry into ordinary channels
of business.
                                                         It may be noted
                                                         that "any
                                                         organization"
                                                         includes and
                                                         organization
                                                         registered under
                                                         section 12A of the

Income-tax Act, 1961 and working for the benefit
of persons with disability or recognized under
Chapter X of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal
Opportunities, Protection or Rights and full
Participation) Act, 1995 or receiving grants from
the government for facilitating access to persons
with disabilities or an educational institution or
library or archives recognized by the
Government.
( xxxiii) the importation of copies of any literary or
artistic work, such as labels, company logos or
promotional or explanatory material, that is
purely incidental to other goods or products
being imported lawfully.
In the Chancellor, Masters and Scholars of the
University of Oxford and Ors. vs. Rameshwari
Photocopy Services and Ors. (16.09.2016 -
DELHC) : CS(OS) 2439/2012, I.A. Nos.
14632/2012, 430 and 3455/2013, in this case,
the plaintiffs instituted this suit for the relief of
permanent injunction restraining the two
defendants from infringing the copyright of the
plaintiffs in their publications by photocopying,
reproduction and distribution of copies of
plaintiffs' publications on a large scale and
circulating the same and by sale of unauthorised
compilations of substantial extracts from the
plaintiffs' publications by compiling them into
course packs/anthologies for sale.
Court inter alia held that -
Copyright, specially in literary works, is thus not
an inevitable, divine, or natural right that confers
on authors the absolute ownership of their
creations. It is designed rather to stimulate
activity and progress in the arts for the
intellectual enrichment of the public. Copyright is
intended to increase and not to impede the
harvest of knowledge. It is intended to motivate
the creative activity of authors and inventors in
order to benefit the public....
Applying the tests as aforesaid laid down by the
Courts of (i) integral part of continuous flow; (ii)
connected relation; (iii) incidental; (iv) causal
relationship; (v) during (in the course of time, as
time goes by); (vi) while doing; (vii) continuous
progress from one point to the next in time and
space; and, (viii) in the path in which anything
moves, it has to be held that the words in the
course of instruction" within the meaning of
Section 52(1)(i) supra would include
reproduction of any work while the process of
imparting instruction by the teacher and
receiving instruction by the pupil continues i.e.
during the entire academic session for which the
pupil is under the tutelage of the teacher and that
imparting and receiving of instruction is not
limited to personal interface between teacher
and pupil but is a process commencing from the
teacher readying herself/himself for imparting
instruction, setting syllabus, prescribing text
books, readings and ensuring, whether by
interface in classroom/ tutorials or otherwise by
holding tests from time to time or clarifying
doubts of students, that the pupil stands
instructed in what he/she has approached the
teacher to learn. Similarly the words "in the
course of instruction", even if the word
"instruction" have to be given the same meaning
as 'lecture', have to include within their ambit the
prescription of syllabus the preparation of which
both the teacher and the pupil are required to do
before the lecture and the studies which the
pupils are to do post lecture and so that the
teachers can reproduce the work as part of the
question and the pupils can answer the
questions by reproducing the work, in an
examination. Resultantly, reproduction of any
copyrighted work by the teacher for the purpose
of imparting instruction to the pupil as prescribed
in the syllabus during the academic year would
be within the meaning of Section 52(1)(i) of the
Act.
I thus conclude that the action of the defendant
No. 2 University of making a master photocopy
of the relevant portions (prescribed in syllabus)
of the books of the plaintiffs purchased by the
defendant No. 2 University and kept in its library
and making further photocopies out of the said
master copy and distributing the same to the
students does not constitute infringement of
copyright in the said books under the Copyright
Act."
Remedies against Infringement of Copyright
Section 54 defines the term "owner of copyright"
shall include:
(a) an exclusive licensee;
(b) in the case of an anonymous or
pseudonymous literary, dramatic, musical or
artistic work, the publisher of the work, until the
identity of the author or, in the case of an
anonymous work of joint authorship, or a work of
joint authorship published under names all of
which are pseudonyms, the identity of any of the
authors, is disclosed publicly by the author and
the publisher or is otherwise establishment to the
satisfaction of the Commercial Court by that
author or his legal representatives.
Section 55 provides for the civil remedies for
infringement of copyright and entitles the owner
of the copyright to all such remedies by way of
injunction, damages, accounts and otherwise as
may be conferred by law for the infringement of
copyright. Section 58 entitles the owner of the
copyright to initiate proceedings for the
possession of infringing copies and other
materials related thereto. In this context, the
section clarifies that all infringing copies of any
work in which copyright subsists and all plates
used or intended to be used for the production of
such infringing copies shall be deemed to be the
property of the owner of the copyright.
The Copyright law in India provided for remedies
to be made available to the author against a
copyright infringer. The Copyright Act, 1957
provides to an author both Civil, Criminal and
border enforcement remedies. They are:
? Civil Remedies: provide for injunctions,
damages, interpretation of accounts, delivery
and destruction of infringing copies and
damages for conversion.
? Criminal Remedies: provide for imprisonment,
fines, seizures of infringing copies and delivery
of infringing copies to the owner.
? Border Enforcement: also provides for
prohibition of import and destruction of any
imported goods that infringe the copyright of a
person with the assistance of the customs
authorities of India.
Protection of Right of Management Information
As per section 65B any person, who knowingly
removes or alters any rights management
information without authority, or distributes,
imports for distribution, broadcasts or
communicates to the public, without authority,
copies of any work, or performance knowing that
electronic rights management information has
been removed or altered without authority, shall
be punishable with imprisonment which may
extend to two years and shall also be liable to
fine.
                                                          the title or other
                                                          information
                                                          identifying the
It may be noted that "Rights Management                   work or
Information" means,-                                (a)   performance;
(b) the name of the author or performer;
(c) the name and address of the owner of rights;
(d) terms and conditions regarding the use of the
rights; and
(e) any number or code that represents the
information referred to in sub-clauses (a) to (d),
but does not include any device or procedure
intended to identify the user.
OFFENCES & PENALTIES
Chapter XIII of the Act containing Sections 63-70
deal with offences and penalities. Section 63
deals with offences of infringement of copyright
or other rights conferred by the Copyright Act,
1957. This section makes, any person who
knowingly infringes or abates the infringement of
the copyright in a work or any other right
conferred under the Act (except for resale share
right in original copies), liable to imprisonment
for a minimum period of six months which may
extend to three years and with minimum fine of
fifty thousand rupees which may extend upto
rupees two lakhs. However, the court has been
empowered to impose a sentence less than six
months or a fine less than fifty thousand, if the
infringement had not been made for gain in the
course of trade or business. In such situations,
the section requires the courts to mention
adequate and special reasons in the judgement.
Section 63 criminalises the infringement of
copyright and other associated rights conferred
by the Copyright Act except for the right to resale
share in original copies under section 53 A. It
prescribes imprisonment for a term not less than
6 months which may extend up to 3 years and
with a fine, not less than fifty thousand rupees
which may extend to two lakh rupees.
According to section 63, any person who
knowingly infringes or even abets the
infringement of the copyright in a work or any
other rights conferred by the Copyright Act
except the right to resale share in original copies
commits the offence of copyright.
In the case of Jitendra Prasad Singh vs. State of
Assam (2003) 26 PTC 486 GAU, the Hon'ble
Gauhati High Court held that the phrase
"punishable with imprisonment for a term, which
may extend to three years" will mean that the
imprisonment can be for a term as long as three
years, but the expression, "punishable with
imprisonment for less than three years" will
mean that the imprisonment can be for a term
less than three years. Therefore, offences under
Section 63 of the Act are non-bailable in nature,
and as such an application for anticipatory bail
will be maintainable.
M/s Knit Pro International vs. the State of NCT of
Delhi & Anr. (Criminal Appeal No. 807 of 2022)
the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India Judgement
dated May 20, 2022 inter alia observed that thus,
for the offence under Section 63 of the Copyright
Act, the punishment provided is imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than six months
but which may extend to three years and with
fine. Therefore, the maximum punishment which
can be imposed would be three years.
Therefore, the learned Magistrate may sentence
the accused for a period of three years also. In
that view of the matter considering Part II of the
First Schedule of the Cr.P.C., if the offence is
punishable with imprisonment for three years
and onwards but not more than seven years the
offence is a cognizable offence. Only in a case
where the offence is punishable for
imprisonment for less than three years or with
fine only the offence can be said to be non-
cognizable. In view of the above clear position of
law, the decision in the case of Rakesh Kumar
Paul (supra) relied upon by learned counsel
appearing on behalf of respondent no.2 shall not
be applicable to the facts of the case on hand.
The language of the provision in Part II of First
Schedule is very clear and there is no ambiguity
whatsoever.
Under the circumstances the High Court has
committed a grave error in holding that the
offence under Section 63 of the Copyright Act is
a non-cognizable offence. Thereby the High
Court has committed a grave error in quashing
and setting aside the criminal proceedings and
the FIR. Therefore, the impugned judgment and
order passed by the High Court quashing and
setting aside the criminal proceedings/FIR under
Section 63 of the Copyright Act deserves to be
quashed and set aside.
In view of the above discussion and for the
reason stated above, it is observed and held that
offence under Section 63 of the Copyright Act is
a cognizable and non-bailable offence.
Consequently, the impugned judgment and order
passed by the High Court taking a contrary view
is hereby quashed and set aside and the
criminal proceedings against respondent No.2
for the offence under Sections 63 & 64 of the
Copyright Act now shall be proceeded further in
accordance with law and on its own merits
treating the same as a cognizable and non-
bailable offence.
Power of Police to Seize Infringing Copies
Section 64 of the Act empowers any Police
Officer, not below the rank of a sub-inspector, to
seize without warrant, all copies of the work and
all plates used for the purpose of making
infringing copies of the work, wherever they are
found. However such Police Officer has to
satisfy himself before such seizure, that an
offence under Section 63 in respect of the
infringement of copyright in any work has been,
is being or is likely to be committed. Further,
such Police Officer has been put under obligation
to produce before the Magistrate, as soon as
practicable, all copies and plates so seized. Any
interested person may make an application to
Magistrate, with in fifteen days of such seizure,
for restoring to him such copies and plates.
Section 65 makes liable, any person, who
knowingly makes or has in his possession, any
plate for the purpose of making infringing copies
of any work in which copyright subsists, to
imprisonment which may extend to two years
and also fine.

LESSON ROUND-UP
l Copyright is a well-recognized form of property
right which had its roots in the common law
system and subsequently came to be governed
by the national laws in each country. In India, the
law relating to copyright is governed by the
Copyright Act, 1957.
l Copyright ensures certain minimum safeguards
of the rights of authors over their creations.
l Literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works
enjoy copyright protection for the life time of the
author plus 60 years beyond i.e. 60 years after
his death. In the case of joint authorship which
implies collaboration of two or more authors in
the production of the work, the term of copyright
is to be construed as a reference to the author
who dies last.
l The Act is amended in 2012 with the object of
making certain changes for clarity, to remove
operational difficulties and also to address
certain newer issues that have emerged in the
context of digital technologies and the Internet.
l Section 18 of the Copyright Act provides for the
assignment of copyright in an existing work as
well as future work. In both the cases an
assignment may be made of the copyright either
wholly or partially and generally or subject to
limitations and that too for the whole period of
copyright or part thereof.
l Copyright protection gives exclusive rights to
the owners of the work to reproduce the work
enabling them to derive financial benefits by
exercising such rights. If any person without
authorisation from the owner exercises these
rights in respect of the work which has copyright
protection it constitutes an infringement of the
copyright.
l Certain exceptions to infringement have been
stipulated by the Copyright Act. The object of
these exceptions is to enable the reproduction of
the work for certain public purposes, and for
encouragement of private study, research and
promotion of education.
l The Copyright Act provides for the civil
remedies for infringement of copyright and
entitles the owner of the copyright to all such
remedies by way of injunction, damages, and
accounts.
TEST YOURSELF
(These are meant for re-capitulation only.
Answers to these questions are not to be
submitted for evaluation.)
1. Briefly explain the concept of copyright.
2. Discuss in detail the Copyright Society.
3. Discuss in detail the provisions relating to
infringement of copyright.
4. Write short note on the following:
(i) Government work.
(ii) Term of Copyright.
5. Elaborate the provisions relating to certain
exception to infringement have been stipulated
by the Copyright Act.

LIST OF FURTHER READINgS
? Bare Act - Copyright Act, 1957 and rules made
thereunder ? Copyright Law - Central Law
Publications
OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDINg
WEbSITES / vIDEO LINKS)
? https://copyright.gov.in/




REgULATORY FRAMEWORK
? Geographical Indications of Goods
(Registration and Protection) Act, 1999
? The Geographical Indications of Goods
(Registration and Protection) Rules, 2002
INTRODUCTION
The desire of mankind for quality and genuine
premium products such as silk, cotton and
spices, having distinct characteristics originating
from a particular region, have over centuries
created an impact on human civilization which
has resulted in discovery of new sea routes and
new continents. These identifications became so
important that these regions started specializing
in producing these unique products, which led to
identifying such goods as originating from a
particular region, which over a period of time has
become renowned globally. Rising demand for
such products among the consumers, gave rise
for counterfeit products, which began to tarnish
the image of genuine products. A effort to
safeguard the interest of the producers and
consumers led to evolution and
conceptualization of "Geographical Indications".
Every region has its claim to fame. Each fame
and reputation was carefully built up and
painstakingly maintained by the masters of that
region, combining the best of nature, man and
traditionally handed over from one generation to
the next for centuries. Gradually, a specific link
between the goods and place of production
evolved resulting in growth of geographical
indications.
Geographical Indications of Goods are that
aspect of industrial property which refers to a
country or to a place situated therein as being
the country or place of origin of that product.
Typically, such a name conveys an assurance of
quality and distinctiveness which is essentially
attributable to the fact of its origin in that defined
geographical locality, region or country.
Geographical Indications covered under Articles
22 to 24 of the WTO Trade Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement,
which was part of the Agreements concluding
the Uruguay Round of GATT negotiations.
Geographical Indications as being used currently
includes both the above concepts and it refers to
"... indications which identify a good as
originating in the territory of a country, or a
region or locality in that territory, where a given
quality, reputation or other characteristic of the
good is essentially attributable to its
geographical origin." (Article 22.1 of the TRIPS
Agreement). Consequent upon India joining as a
member state of the TRIPS Agreement a sui-
generis legislation for the protection of
Geographical Indications was enacted in 1999.
The object of the Geographical Indications of
Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999 is
three fold, firstly by specific law governing the
geographical indications of goods in the country
which could adequately protect the interest of
producers of such goods, secondly, to exclude
unauthorized persons from misusing
geographical indications and to protect
consumers from deception and thirdly, to
promote goods bearing Indian geographical
indications in the export market.
Examples of Indian Geographical Indications
are: Darjeeling Tea, Kanchipuram Silk Saree,
Alphanso Mango, Nagpur Orange, Kolhapuri
Chappal, Bikaneri Bhujia, Agra Petha etc.
geographical Indication
Geographical indication in relation to goods
means an indication which identifies such goods
as agricultural goods, natural goods or
manufactured goods as originating, or
manufactured in the territory of a country, or a
region or locality in that territory, where a given
quality, reputation or other characteristic of such
goods is essentially attributable to its
geographical origin and in case where such
goods are manufactured goods one of the
activities of either the production or of
processing or preparation of the goods
concerned takes place in such territory, region or
locality, as the case may be.
It may be noted that any name which is not the
name of a country, region or locality of that
country shall also be considered as the
geographical indication if it relates to a specific
geographical area and is used upon or in relation
to particular goods originating from that country,
region or locality, as the case may be. [Section
2(e)]

It may be noted that:
Goods means any agricultural, natural or
manufactured goods or any goods of handicraft
or of industry and includes food stuff.
Indication includes any name, geographical or
figurative representation or any combination of
them conveying or suggesting the geographical
origin of goods to which it applies.
Example of Registered geographical Indications
Darjeeling Tea (word & logo); Pochampalli Ikat ;
Salem Fabric; Chanderi Sarees; Solapur
Chaddar; Solapur Terry Towel; ; Kotpad
Handloom fabric ; Mysore Silk ; Kota Doria;
Mysore Agarbathi; Kancheepuram Silk ;Bhavani
Jamakkalam ; Kullu Shawl ; Madurai Sungudi ;
Madur kathi; Banaras Zardozi; Gorgonzola (Food
Stuff, Italy); Wooden Mask of Kushmand;
Gobindobhog Rice; Kashmiri Hand Knotted
Carpet, Orissa Pattachitra; Berhampur Patta
(Phoda Kumbha) Saree & Joda; Madhubani
Paintings; Raktsey Karpo Apricot of Ladakh etc.
Indication
Indication includes any name, geographical or
figurative representation or any combination of
them conveying or suggesting the geographical
origin of goods to which it applies. [Section 2(g)]
Prohibition of Registration of Certain
geographical Indications
Section 9 of the Act prohibits registration of
certain geographical indications. They are as
follows:-
(a) the use of which would be likely to deceive or
cause confusion; or
(b) the use of which would be contrary to any law
for the time being in force; or
(c) which comprises or contains scandalous or
obscene matter; or
(d) which comprises or contains any matter likely
to hurt the religious susceptibilities of any class
or section of the citizens of India; or
(e) which would otherwise be disentitled to
protection in a court; or
(f) which are determined to be generic names or
indications of goods and are, therefore, not or
ceased to be protected in their country of origin,
or which have fallen into disuse in that country;
or
(g) which, although literally true as to the
territory, region or locality in which the goods
originate, but falsely represent to the persons
that the goods originate in another territory,
region or locality, as the case may be;
shall not be registered as a geographical
indication.
It may be noted that "generic names or
indications'', in relation to goods, means the
name of a goods which, although relates to the
place or the region where the goods was
originally produced or manufactured has lost its
original meaning and has become the common
name of such goods and serves as a designation
for or indication of the kind, nature, type or other
property or characteristic of the goods.
However, in determining whether the name has
become generic, account shall be taken of all
factors including the existing situation in the
region or place in which the name originates and
the area of consumption of the goods.
Registration of geographical Indication
Section 8 of the Act provides that a geographical
indication may be registered in respect of any or
all of the goods, comprised in such class of
goods as may be classified by a region or locality
in that territory, as the case may be the Registrar
and in respect of a definite territory of a country.
The Registrar may also classify the goods under
in accordance with the International
classification of goods for the purposes of
registration of geographical indications and
publish in the prescribed manner in an
alphabetical index of classification of goods.
Any question arising as to the class within which
any goods fall or the definite area in respect of
which the geographical indication is to be
registered or where any goods are not specified
in the alphabetical index of goods published
shall be determined by the Registrar whose
decision in the matter shall be final.
Application for Registration
Under section 11 any association of persons or
producers or any organisation or authority
established by or under any law for the time
being in force representing the interest of the
producers of the concerned goods, who are
desirous of registering a geographical indication
in relation to such goods shall apply in writing to
the Registrar in such form and in such manner
and accompanied by such fees as may be
prescribed for the registration of the
geographical indication.
The application shall contain -
> A single application may be a statement as to
how the geographical indication serves to
designate the goods as originating from the
concerned territory of the country or region or
locality in the country, as the case may be, in
respect of specific quality, reputation or other
characteristics of which are due exclusively or
essentially to the geographical environment, with
its inherent natural and human factors, and the
production, processing or preparation of which
takes place in such territory, region or locality, as
the case may be;
> the class of goods to which the geographical
indication shall apply;
> the geographical map of the territory of the
country or region or locality in the country in
which the goods originate or are being
manufactured;
> the particulars regarding the appearance of the
geographical indication as to whether it is
comprised of the words or figurative elements or
both;
> a statement containing such particulars of the
producers of the concerned goods, if any,
proposed to be initially registered with the
registration of the geographical indication as may
be prescribed; and
> such other prescribed particulars.
Application maybe made for registration of a
geographical indication for different classes of
goods and fee payable therefore shall be in
respect of each such class of goods.
Every application shall be filed in the office of the
Geographical Indications Registry within whose
territorial limits, the territory of the country or the
region or locality in the country to which the
geographical indication elates is situated.
Every application shall be examined by the
Registrar in such manner as may be prescribed.
The Registrar may refuse the application or may
accept it absolutely or subject to such
amendments, modification, conditions or
limitations, if any, as he thinks fit. In the case of
refusal or conditional acceptance of application,
the Registrar shall record in writing the grounds
for such refusal or conditional acceptance and
the materials used by him in arriving at his
decision.
Registration
Section 16 provides that on the registration of a
geographical indication, the Registrar shall issue
each to the applicant and the authorised users, if
registered with the geographical indication, a
certificate sealed with the seal of the
Geographical Indications Registry.
It may be noted that where registration of a
geographical indication is not completed within
twelve months from the date of the application by
reason of default on the part of the applicant, the
Registrar may, after giving notice to the applicant
in the prescribed manner treat the application as
abandoned unless it is completed within the time
specified in that behalf in the notice.
Step by Step guide on geographical Indication of
goods Registration Process
Step 1 : Filing of application
Please check whether the indication comes
within the ambit of the definition of a
Geographical Indication under section 2(1)(e) of
the Act.
The association of persons or producers or any
organization or authority should represent the          ? Application
interest of producers of the concerned goods            must be
and should file an affidavit how the applicant          made in
claims to represent their interest.                     triplicate.
* The application shall be signed by the applicant
or his agent and must be accompanied by a
statement of case.
                                                                                              Details of the
                                                                                              inspection
                                                                        Three certified       structure if any
                                                                        copies of the map     to regulate the
                                                                        of the region to      use of the GI in
* Details of the special characteristics and how                        which the GI          the territory to
those standards are maintained.                       ?                 relates.          ?   which it relates.
* Give details of all the applicant together with
address. If there is a large number of producers ? The
a collective reference to all the producers of the Examiner will
goods may be made in the application and the scrutinize the
GI. If registered will be indicated accordingly in application for
the register. Step 2 & 3: Preliminary Scrutiny and any
Examination                                        deficiencies.
* The applicant should within one month of the
communication in this regard, remedy the same.
* The content of statement of case is assessed
by a consultative group of experts will versed on
the subject.
* The will ascertain the correctness of particulars
furnished.
                                                                     If the Registrar        The applicant
                                                                     has any objection       must respond
                                                                     to the application,     within two
                                                                     he will                 months or
* Thereafter an Examination Report would be                          communicate             apply for a
issued. Step 4: Show Cause Notice                  ?                 such objection.     ?   hearing.
* The decision will be duly communicated. If the
applicant wishes to appeal, he may within one
month make a request.
* The Registrar is also empowered to withdraw
an application, if it is accepted in error, after
giving on opportunity of being heard.
Step 5: Publication in the Geographical
Indications Journal
Every application, within three month of
acceptance shall be published in the
Geographical Indications Journal. Step 6:
Opposition to Registration
* Any person can file a notice of opposition within
three months (extendable by another month on
request which has to be filed before three
months) opposing the GI application published in
the Journal.
                                                                    Within two months
                                                                    the applicant shall
* The registrar shall serve a copy of the notice                    sent a copy of the
on the applicant.                                   ?               counter statement.
* If he does not do this be shall be deemed to
have abandoned his application. Where the
counterstatement has been filed, the registrar
shall serve a copy on the person giving the
notice of opposition.
* Thereafter, both sides will lead their respective
evidences by way of affidavit and supporting
documents.
                                                    ? Where an
                                                    application for
                                                    a GI has been
                                                    accepted, the
                                                    registrar shall
                                                    register the
                                                    geographical
                                                    indication. If
                                                    registered the
                                                    date of filing
                                                    of the
                                                    application
                                                    shall be
                                                    deemed to be
* A date for hearing of the case will be fixed      the date of
thereafter. Step 7: Registration                    registration.
* The registrar shall issue to the applicant a
certificate with the seal of the Geographical
indications registry. Step 8: Renewal
A registered GI shall be valid for 10 years and
can be renewed on payment of renewal fee.
Step 9: Additional Protection to Notified Goods
Additional protection for notified goods is
provided in the Act.
Step 10: Appeal
Any person aggrieved by an order or decision
may prefer an appeal .

Duration of registration
Section 18 of the Act deals with duration,
renewal, removal and restoration of registration
of Geographical Indication. The registration of a
geographical indication shall be for a period of
ten years, but may be renewed from time to time
in accordance with the provisions of this section.

The registration of an authorised user shall be
for a period of ten years or for the period till the
date on which the registration of the
geographical indication in respect of which the
auhorised user is registered expires, whichever
is earlier.
The Registrar shall, on application made in the
prescribed manner, by the registered proprietor
or by the authorised user and within the
prescribed period and subject to the payment of
the prescribed fee, renew the registration of the
geographical indication or authorised user, as
the case may be, for a period of ten years from
the date of expiration of the original registration
or of the last renewal of registration, as the case
may be.
Infringement of Unregistered geographical
Indication
As per section 20 of the Act a person shall not
be entitled to institute any proceeding to prevent,
or to recover damages for, the infringement of
an unregistered geographical indication.
Infringement of Registered geographical
Indications
As per section 22 a registered geographical
indication is infringed by a person who, not being
an authorized user thereof uses such
geographical indication by any means in the
designations or presentation of goods that
indicates or suggests that such goods originate
in a geographical area other than the true place
of origin of such goods in a manner goods; or
which misleads the persons as to the
geographical origin of such goods; or uses any
geographical indication in such manner which
constitutes an act of unfair competition including
passing off in respect of registered geographical
indication.
It may be noted that "act of unfair competition''
means any act of competition contrary to honest
practices in industrial or commercial matters.
The following acts shall be deemed to be acts of
unfair competition, namely:
* all acts of such a nature as to create confusion
by any means whatsoever with the
establishment, the goods or the industrial or
commercial activities, of a competitor;
* false allegations in the course of trade of such
a nature as to discredit the establishment, the
goods or the industrial or commercial activities,
of a competitor;
* geographical indications, the use of which in
the course of trade is liable to mislead the
persons as to the nature, the manufacturing
process, the characteristics, the suitability for
their purpose, or the quantity, of the goods.
A registered geographical indication is infringed
by a person who, not being an authorised user
thereof uses another geographical indication to
the goods which, although literally true as to the
territory, region or locality in which the goods
originate, falsely represents to the persons that
the goods originate in the territory, region or
locality in respect of which such registered
geographical indication relates.
When is a registered Geographical Indication
said to be infringed?
* When an unauthorised user uses a
geographical indication that indicates or
suggests that such goods originate in a
geographical area other than the true place of
origin of such goods in a manner which mislead
the public as to the geographical origin of such
goods.
* When the use of geographical indication result
in an unfair competition including passing off in
respect of registered geographical indication.
* When the use of another geographical
indication results in false representation to the
public that goods originate in a territory in
respect of which a registered geographical
indication relates.

Assignment or Transmission
Section 24 of the Act prohibits assignment or
transmission of geographical indication. It states
that any right to a registered geographical
indication shall not be the subject matter of
assignment, transmission, licensing, pledge,
mortgage or any such other agreement.
However, on the death of an authorised user his
right in a registered geographical indication shall
devolve on his successor in title under the law
for the time being in force.
Prohibition of Registration of geographical
Indication as Trade mark
Section 25 of the Act provides that the Registrar
of Trade Marks shall, suo-motu or at the request
of an interested party, refuse or invalidate the
registration of a trade mark which contains or
consists of a geographical indication with respect
to the goods or class or classes of goods not
originating in the territory of a country, or a
region or locality in that territory which such
geographical indication indicates, if use of such
geographical indications in the trade mark for
such goods, is of such a nature as to confuse or
mislead the persons as to the true place of origin
of such goods or class or classes of goods.
How a Geographical Indication is different from a
Trade Mark?
> A trade mark is a sign which is used in the
course of trade and it distinguishes goods or
services of one enterprise from those of other
enterprises.
> Whereas a geographical indication is an
indication used to identify goods having special
characteristics originating from a definite
geographical territory.
In the case of Tea Board, India vs. ITC Limited
(GA No. 3137 of 2010 CS No. 250 of 2010),
Judgement dated 20 April, 2011 plaintiff moved
an interlocutory application for temporary
injunction for restraining the defendant from
using or conducting or making its business at the
hotel by the name "DARJEELING LOUNGE".
Application stated that usage of the word
"DARJEELING" in the name and logo by
defendants is passing off or attempting to pass
off its business or services so as to discredit the
fame of Darjeeling tea as a geographical
indication and/ or to mislead persons.
Hon'ble Calcutta High Court inter alia observed
that passing-off as in Section 20(2) of the GI Act
has to be seen in the light of what it implies in
trade mark law. As to whether any goods or
services are passed off as some other goods or
services would depend on a variety of factors
ranging from the nature of the marks, their
resemblance, the nature of the goods and
services, the similarity of the character of the
goods and services, the mode of accessing the
goods or services and other surrounding
circumstances.
The word "Darjeeling" - as precious to tea as it
may be as champagne to sparkling wines of that
province in France - cannot be exclusively
claimed by the plaintiff by virtue of its registration
as a geographical indication or as a certification
trade mark. Even for a case of passing-off, the
use of "Darjeeling" by a person other than the
plaintiff can be complained of if the word or the
geographical indication has any nexus with the
product with which it is exclusively associated
upon the registration. It is not necessary to
consider whether a "Darjeeling Tea Stall" selling
only hot cups of tea can entitle the plaintiff to
carry a complaint in respect thereof or a
"Darjeeling Tea House" selling all varieties of
packaged tea can be said to be in derogation of
the plaintiff's rights. The defendant's "Darjeeling
Lounge" is an exclusive area within the confines
of its hotel which is accessible only to its high-
end customers. The lounge is a place where
such customers and accompanying visitors may
frequent, and even sip Darjeeling tea or any
other beverage or drink, but there is scarcely any
likelihood of deception or confusion in the lounge
being named "Darjeeling" for the plaintiff to be
granted to any order that it seeks.
As to the case of dilution, the name "Darjeeling"
has been extensively used in trading and
commercial circles for decades before the GI Act
was enacted. In a case of dilution by blurring, it
is the uniqueness of a mark which is protected
even in a case where there is no likelihood of
confusion. But the word "Darjeeling" has been
and continues to be so widely used as a
business name or for like purpose for so long
that the plaintiff's recent registration would, prima
facie, not entitle it to enjoy the kind of exclusivity
that it asserts.
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE
Meaning of Applying geographical Indications
Section 37 of the Act provides that a person
shall be deemed to apply a geographical
indication to goods who:
(a) applies it to the goods themselves; or
(b) applies it to any package in or with which the
goods are sold, or exposed for sale, or had in
possession for sale or for any purpose of trade
or manufacture; or
(c) places, encloses or annexes any goods which
are sold, or exposed for sale, or had in
possession for sale or for any purpose of trade
or manufacture, in or with any package or other
thing to which a geographical indication has been
applied; or
(d) uses a geographical indication in any manner
reasonably likely to lead to the belief that the
goods in connection with which it is used are
designated or described by that geographical
indication; or
(e) in relation to the goods uses a geographical
indication in any sign, advertisement, invoice,
catalogue, business letter, business paper, price
list or other commercial documents and goods
are delivered to a person in pursuance of a
request or order made by reference to the
geographical indication as so used.
A geographical indication shall be deemed to be
applied to goods whether it is woven in,
impressed on, or otherwise worked into, or
annexed or affixed to, the goods or to any
package or other thing.
Falsifying and Falsely Applying geographical
Indications
Section 38 states that a person shall be deemed
to falsify a geographical indication who, either:
(a) without the assent of the authorised user of
the geographical indication makes that
geographical indication or deceptively similar
geographical indication; or
(b) falsifies any genuine geographical indication,
whether by alteration, addition, effacement or
otherwise.
A person shall be deemed to falsely apply to
goods a geographical indication who, without the
assent of the authorised user of the geographical
indication:
(a) applies such geographical indication or a
deceptively similar geographical indication to
goods or any package containing goods;
(b) uses any package bearing a geographical
indication which is identical with or deceptively
similar to the geographical indication of such
authorised user, for the purpose of packing,
filling or wrapping therein any goods other than
the genuine goods of the authorised user of the
geographical indication.
Any geographical indication falsified or falsely
applied referred to as a false geographical
indication.
In any prosecution for falsifying a geographical
indication or falsely applying a geographical
indication to goods, the burden of proving the
assent of proprietor shall lie on the accused.
Penalty for Applying False geographical
Indications
According to Section 39 of the Act, any person
who:
(a) falsifies any geographical indication; or
(b) falsely applies to goods any geographical
indication; or
(c) makes, disposes of, or has in his possession,
any die, block, machine, plate or other
instrument for the purpose of falsifying or of
being used for falsifying, a geographical
indication; or
(d) applies to any goods to which an indication of
the country or place in which they were made or
produced or the name and the address of the
manufacturer or person for whom the goods are
manufactured is required to be applied under
section 71, a false indication of such country,
place, name or address; or
(e) tampers with, alters or effaces an indication
of origin which has been applied to any goods to
which it is required to be applied under section
71; or
(f) causes any of the things above-mentioned in
this section to be done, shall, unless he proves
that he acted, without intent to defraud,
be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than six months but which
may extend to three years and with fine which
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but
which may extend to two lakh rupees.
It may be noted that the court may, for adequate
and special reasons to be mentioned in the
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment
for a term of less than six months or a fine of less
than fifty thousand rupees.
Special Provisions Relating to Applications for
Registration from Citizens of Convention
Countries
Section 84 empowers Central Government may
by notification in the Official Gazette, declare
such country or group of countries or union of
countries or Inter-Governmental Organisations to
be a convention country or convention countries
for the purposes of the Act for the fulfillment of a
treaty, convention or arrangement with any
country or a country which is a member of a
group of countries or union of countries or Inter-
Governmental Organisations outside India which
affords to citizens of India similar privileges as
granted to its own citizens.
LESSON ROUND-UP
* Geographical indication in relation to goods
means an indication which identifies such goods
as agricultural goods, natural goods or
manufactured goods as originating, or
manufactured in the territory of a country, or a
region or locality in that territory, where a given
quality, reputation or other characteristic of such
goods is essentially attributable to its
geographical origin and in case where such
goods are manufactured goods one of the
activities of either the production or of
processing or preparation of the goods
concerned takes place in such territory, region or
locality, as the case may be.
* Goods mean any agricultural, natural or
manufactured goods or any goods of handicraft
or of industry and includes food stuff.
* Indication includes any name, geographical or
figurative representation or any combination of
them conveying or suggesting the geographical
origin of goods to which it applies.
* The object of the Geographical Indications of
Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999 is
three fold, firstly by specific law governing the
geographical indications of goods in the country
which could adequately protect the interest of
producers of such goods, secondly, to exclude
unauthorized persons from misusing
geographical indications and to protect
consumers from deception and thirdly, to
promote goods bearing Indian geographical
indications in the export market.
* Any association of persons or producers or any
organisation or authority established by or under
any law for the time being in force representing
the interest of the producers of the concerned
goods, who are desirous of registering a
geographical indication in relation to such goods
shall apply in writing to the Registrar in such
form and in such manner and accompanied by
such fees as may be prescribed for the
registration of the geographical indication.
* A trade mark is a sign which is used in the
course of trade and it distinguishes goods or
services of one enterprise from those of other
enterprises. Whereas a geographical indication
is an indication used to identify goods having
special characteristics originating from a definite
geographical territory.
TEST YOURSELF
(These are meant for re-capitulation only.
Answers to these questions are not to be
submitted for evaluation.)
1. What is a Geographical Indication?
2. What is the benefit of registration of
geographical indications?
3. How long the registration of Geographical
Indication is valid?
4. When is a registered Geographical Indication
said to be infringed?
5. Can a registered geographical indication be
assigned, transmitted?
LIST OF FURTHER READINgS
l Bare Act - The Geographical Indications of
Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999
and rules made thereunder.
l Intellectual Property Laws and Practice -
Elizabeth Verkey
OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDINg
WEbSITES / vIDEO LINKS)
* https://ipindia.gov.in/gi.htm




REgULATORY FRAMEWORK
                                                                             Designs Rules,
                                                   ?   Designs Act, 2000 ?   2001
INTRODUCTION
Industrial designs refer to creative activity which
result in the ornamental or formal appearance of
a product and design right refers to a novel or
original design that is accorded to the proprietor
of a validly registered design. Industrial designs
are an element of intellectual property.
The first legislation in India for protection of
Industrial Designs was The Patents & Designs
Protection Act, 1872. It supplemented the 1859
Act passed by Governor General of India for
granting exclusive privileges to inventors and
added protection for Industrial Design. The 1872
Act included the term - any new and original
pattern or design, or the application of such
pattern or design to any substance or article of
manufacture'.
The Inventions & Designs Act of 1888 re-enacted
the law relating to protection of inventions and
designs and contained provision relating to
Designs in a separate part 3. The Patents &
Designs Act enacted in 1911 also provided for
protection of Industrial Designs. The Patents Act,
1970 repealed the provisions of the Patents and
Designs Act, 1911, so far as they related to
Patents. However, the provisions relating to
Designs were not repealed and continued to
govern the Designs Law.
India joined the WTO as a - member State in
1995. Consequently, the Patents & Designs Act,
1911 was repealed and the Designs Act, 2000
was enacted, to make the Designs Law in India
TRIPS compliant. Article 25 of the World Trade
Organization TRIPS Agreement, obliges
Members to provide for the protection of
independently created industrial designs that are
new or original. A design which is not new or
original; or which has been disclosed to the
public anywhere; or which is not significantly
distinguishable from known design or
combination of known design; or which
comprises or contains scandalous or obscene
matter are prohibited for registration under the
Design Act, 2000.
The objective of the Designs Act, 2000 is to
protect new or original designs so created to be
applied or applicable to particular article to be
manufactured by Industrial Process or means.
Sometimes purchase of articles for use is
influenced not only by their practical efficiency
but also by their appearance. The important
purpose of design registration is to see that the
artisan, creator, originator of a design having
aesthetic look is not deprived of his bonafide
reward by others applying it to their goods.
In the case of Bharat Glass Tube Limited vs.
Gopal Glass Works Limited, Appeal (Civil) 3185
of 2008 Judgement dated 1 May, 2008, Supreme
Court of India observed that:
It may be mentioned here that in 1911 the
Designs Act was passed by the then British
Government in India. But with the advancement
of science and technology and the number of
registration of the design having increased in
India, the Act of 1911 was amended wholesale
by the Parliament and this new Act known as
Designs Act, 2000 came to be introduced in the
Parliament and the same was passed as such.
The statement of objects and reasons read as
under:
Since the enactment of the Designs Act, 1911
considerable progress has been made in the
field of science and technology. The legal
system of the protection of industrial designs
requires to be made more efficient in order to
ensure effective protection to registered designs.
It is also required to promote design activity in
order to promote the design element in an article
of production. The proposed Design Bill is
essentially aimed to balance these interests. It is
also intended to ensure that the law does not
unnecessarily extent protection beyond what is
necessary to create the required incentive for
design activity while removing impediments to
the free use of available designs.
In fact, the sole purpose of this Act is protection
of the intellectual property right of the original
design for a period of ten years or whatever
further period extendable. The object behind this
enactment is to benefit the person for his
research and labour put in by him to evolve the
new and original design. This is the sole aim of
enacting this Act. It has also laid down that if
design is not new or original or published
previously then such design should not be
registered. It further lays down that if it has been
disclosed to the public anywhere in India or in
any other country by publication in tangible form
or by use or in any other way prior to the filing
date, or where applicable, the priority date of the
application for registration then such design will
not be registered or if it is found that it is not
significantly distinguishable from known designs
or combination of known designs, then such
designs shall not be registered. It also provides
that registration can be cancelled under section
19 of the Act if proper application is filed before
the competent authority i.e. the Controller that
the design has been previously registered in
India or published in India or in any other country
prior to the date of registration, or that the design
is not a new or original design or that the design
is not registerable under this Act or that it is not a
design as defined in clause (d) of section 2. The
Controller after hearing both the parties if
satisfied that the design is not new or original or
that it has already been registered or if it is not
registerable, cancel such registration and
aggrieved against that order, appeal shall lie to
the High Court. These prohibitions have been
engrafted so as to protect the original person
who has designed a new one by virtue of his
own efforts by researching for a long time. The
new and original design when registered is for a
period of ten years. Such original design which is
new and which has not been available in the
country or has not been previously registered or
has not been published in India or in any other
country prior to the date of registration shall be
protected for a period of ten years. Therefore, it
is in the nature of protection of the intellectual
property right. This was the purpose as is evident
from the statement of objects and reasons and
from various provisions of the Act......
In the case of Escorts construction Equipment
Ltd. vs. Action construction Equipment Pvt. Ltd
1999 PTC 36(Del) at pp 39, 40, 48], Delhi High
Court observed that the primary object the Act is
to protect shape and not the function or
functional shape. The expression design doesn't
include a method or principle of construction or
features of shape or configuration which is
dictated solely by the function which the article to
be made in that shape or configuration has to
perform.
DESIgN
As per section 2(d) Design means only the
features of shape, configuration, pattern or
ornament or composition of lines or colour or
combination thereof applied to any article
whether two dimensional or three dimensional or
in both forms, by any industrial process or
means, whether manual, mechanical or
chemical, separate or combined, which in the
finished article appeal to and are judged solely
by the eye, but does not include any mode or
principle or construction or anything which is in
substance a mere mechanical device, and does
not include any trade mark, as define in clause
(v) of sub-section of Section 2 of the Trade and
Merchandise Marks Act, 1958, property mark or
artistic works as defined under Section 2(c) of
the Copyright Act, 1957.
An artistic work as defined under Section 2(c) of
the Copyright Act, 1957 is not a subject matter
for registration which reads as follows:
                                                       ? A painting,
                                                       a sculpture, a
                                                       drawing
                                                       (including a
                                                       diagram,
                                                       map, chart or
                                                       plan) on
                                                       engraving or
                                                       a photograph,
                                                       whether or
                                                       not such work
                                                       possesses
                                                       artistic
Artistic works means:                                  quality;
                                                                                                Any other work
                                                                                                of artistic
                                                                                                craftsmanship.
                                                                                                A design or
                                                                                                pattern covers
                                                                                                the whole body
                                                                                                or the goods
                                                                                                and forms part
                                                                                                and parcel or
                                                                                                the goods but a
                                                                                                trade mark is
                                                                                                apart from and
                                                                                                different from
                                                                                                the goods for
                                                                                                denoting the
                                                                                                goods to be the
                                                                                                manufacture or
                                                                                                merchandise of
                                                                                                a particular
                                                                                                person. The
                                                                                                copying of a
                                                                                                design cannot,
                                                                                                therefore, be
                                                                                                treated as
                                                                                                counterfeiting a
                                                                                                trade mark.
                                                                                                [Narumal
                                                                                                Khemchand vs.
                                                                                                The Bombay
                                                                                                Co., Ltd.,
                                                                          An work of            (1914), 25 Ind.
                                                         ?                architecture; and ?   Cas. 998]
Article means any article of manufacture and any
substance, artificial, or partly artificial and partly
natural; and includes any part of an article
capable of being made and sold separately.
Design is one of the categories of IPR where the
design system focuses on the aesthetic feature
of an article derived from its visual appearance.
Relevant aspects are the shape, configuration,
surface pattern, the colour or line or a
combination thereof as applied to an article
which produces an aesthetic impression on the
sense of sight. Following are the pictorial
examples of design:




Source: 1. https
://ipindia.gov.in/writereaddata/images/pdf/design-
registration.pdf
                                                         2. Design
                                                         Registration
                                                         in India
                                                         (Office of the
                                                         Controller
                                                         General of
                                                         Patent,
                                                         Designs and
                                                         Trademark).

Proprietor of a New or Original Design
(i) Where the author of the design, for good
consideration, executes the work for some other
person, means the person for whom the design
is so executed;
(ii) Where any person acquires the design or the
right to apply the design to any article, either
exclusively of any other person or otherwise,
means, in the respect and to the extent in and to
which the design or right has been so acquired,
the person by whom the design or right is so
acquired; and
(iii) In any other case, means the author of the
design; and where the property in or the right to
apply, the design has devolved from the original
proprietor upon any other person, includes that
other person.
[Section 2(j)]
Prohibition of Registration of Certain Designs
A design which prohibited of registration under
Section 4 of the Design Act, 2000 are as follows:
* is not new or original; or
* has been disclosed to the public anywhere in
India or in any other country by publication in
tangible form or by use or in any other way prior
to the filing date, or where applicable, the priority
date of the application for registration; or
                                                                          comprises or
                                                                          contains
                                                                          scandalous or
                                                                          obscene matter,
* is not significantly distinguishable from known                         shall not be
designs or combination of known designs; or        ?                      registered.
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India held that
expression new or original appearing in Section
4 means that the design which has been
registered has not been published anywhere or it
has been made known to the public and that it
had been invented for the first time or it has not
been reproduced by anyone.
In the matter of M/s Brighto Auto Industries vs.
Shri Raj Chawla (ILR 1978 (I) Delhi) it was held
by the Honorable Court that new is taken
generally to mean as different to what has gone
before and original as something originating from
the author. In the matter of novelty the eye has
to be the ultimate arbiter and the determination
has to rest on the general ocular impression. To
secure recognition for its newness or originality it
is imperative that a design identical with or even
materially similar to the relevant design should
not have been published or registered
previously. A slight trivial or infinitesimal variation
from a preexisting design will not qualify it for
registration taking into account the nature
involved the change introduced should be
substantial. It is not necessary to justify
registration that the whole of the design should
be new, the newness may be confined to only a
part of it but that part must be a significant one
and it should be potent enough to impart to the
whole design a distinct identity, unless the
registration sought for the said part alone.
Further it was held that it is the duty of the court
to take special care that no design shall be
counted new or original, unless it is distinct from
what previously existed by something essentially
new or original which is different from ordinary
trade variants, which may have lost, been
common matters of test or choice in that trade.
Application for Registration of Designs (Section
5)
(1) The Controller may, on the application of any
person claiming to be the proprietor of any new
or original design not previously published in any
country and which is not contrary to public order
or morality, register the design under this Act.
(2) Every application shall be in the prescribed
form and shall be filed in the patent office in the
prescribed manner and shall be accompanied by
the prescribed fee.
(3) A design may be registered in not more than
one class, and, in case of doubt as to the class
in which a design ought to be registered, the
Controller may decide the question.
(4) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, refuse to
register any design presented to him for
registration; but any person aggrieved by any
such refusal may appeal to the High Court.
(5) An application which, owing to any default or
neglect on the part of the applicant, has not been
completed so as to enable registration to be
effected within the prescribed time shall be
deemed to be abandoned.
(6) A design when registered shall be registered
as of the date of the application for registration.
Design Registration Process Workflow

Source: https
://ipindia.gov.in/writereaddata/images/pdf/design-
registration.pdf
Registration to be in respect of Particular Article
(Section 6)
(1) A design may be registered in respect of any
or all of the articles comprised in a prescribed
class of articles.
(2) Any question arising as to the class within
which any article falls shall be determined by the
Controller whose decision in the matter shall be
final.
(3) Where a design has been registered in
respect of any article comprised in a class of
article, the application of the proprietor of the
design to register it in respect of some one or
more other articles comprised in that class of
articles shall not be refused, nor shall the
registration thereof invalidated -
(a) on the ground of the design not being a new
or original design, by reason only that it was so
previously registered; or
(b) on the ground of the design having been
previously published in India or in any other
country, by reason only that it has been applied
to article in respect of which it was previously
registered.
It may be noted that such subsequent
registration shall not extend the period of
copyright in the design beyond that arising from
previous registration.
(4) Where any person makes an application for
the registration of a design in respect of any
article and either-
(a) that design has been previously registered by
another person in respect of some other article;
or
(b) the design to which the application relates
consists of a design previously registered by
another person in respect of the same or some
other article with modifications or variations not
sufficient to alter the character or substantially to
affect the identity thereof, then, if at any time
while the application is pending the applicant
becomes the registered proprietor of the design
previously registered, the foregoing provisions of
this section shall apply as if at the time of making
the application, the applicant, had been the
registered proprietor of that design.
Essential requirements for the registration of
'Design' under the Act
> The design should be new or original, not
previously published or used in any country
before the date of application for registration.
The novelty may reside in the application of a
known shape or pattern to new subject matter.
> The design should relate to features of shape,
configuration, pattern or ornamentation applied
or applicable to an article.
> The design should be applied or applicable to
any article by any industrial process.
> The features of the design in the finished
article should appeal to and are judged solely by
the eye. This implies that the design must
appear and should be visible on the finished
article, for which it is meant.
> Any mode or principle of construction or
operation or anything which is in substance a
mere mechanical device, would not be a
registrable design. For instance a key having its
novelty only in the shape of its corrugation or
bent at the portion intended to engage with
levers inside the lock associated with, cannot be
registered as a design under the Act.
> The design should not include any Trade Mark
or property mark or artistic works as defined
under the Copyright Act, 1957.
Publication of Particulars of Registered Designs
Section 7 of the Act provides that the Controller
shall, as soon as may be after the registration of
a design, cause publication of the prescribed
particulars of the design to be published in such
manner as may be prescribed and thereafter the
design shall be open to public inspection.
Substitution of Applicant or Joint Claiming
(Section 8)
(a) Name of an applicant can be substituted or a
joint claim can be made for an applied design, if
the following requirements are met:
i. The claim for substitution is made before the
design has been registered; and
ii. Right of claimant shall be created only by:
> An assignment;
> Agreement in writing made by the applicant or
one of the applicants; or
> Operation of law;
iii. The design under consideration shall be
identified in the assignment or agreement
specifically by reference to the number of
application for registration; or
iv. The rights of the claimant in respect of the
design have been finally established by a Court.
(b) A request for substitution of applicant shall be
filed in Form-2 along with the required fee. If the
above said requirements are fulfilled and the
Controller is satisfied that, upon registration of
design, the claimant would be entitled to any
interest in the design the Controller may direct
that the application shall proceed:
i. in the names of the claimant(s); or
ii. in the names of the claimant(s) and the
applicant or the other joint applicant(s), as the
case may be.
(c) However, in case of joint applicants, the
Controller shall not pass such direction without
with the consent of the other joint applicant(s);
(d) In case, joint applicant(s) die(s) at any time
before the design has been registered, a request
may be made for substitution by the survivor(s)
and the Controller may direct that the application
shall proceed in the name of the survivors alone.
However, no such direction shall be issued
without the consent of legal representative of the
deceased;
(e) If case, there is any dispute between joint
applicants as to whether or in what manner the
application should be proceeded with an
application may be made by any of the parties.
The Controller may give such directions as he
thinks fit for enabling the application to proceed
in the name of one or more of the parties alone
or for regulating the manner in which it should be
proceeded with, or for both those purposes, as
the case may be. However, the Controller shall
not pass any such direction without giving an
opportunity to be heard to all the concerned
parties.
Certificate of Registration.
Under section 9 of the Design Act, the Controller
grant a certificate of registration to the proprietor
of the design when it registered.
The Controller may, in case of loss of the
original certificate, or in any other case in which
he deems it expedient, furnish one or more
copies of the certificate.
Effect of Registration of Design
The registration of a design confers upon the
registered proprietor 'Copyright' in the design for
the period of registration. 'Copyright' means the
exclusive right to apply a design to the article
belonging to the class in which it is registered.
Register of Designs
Section 10 of the Act provides that there shall be
kept at the patent office a book called the
register of designs, wherein shall be entered the
names and addresses of proprietors of
registered designs, notifications of assignments
and of transmissions of registered designs, and
such other matter as may be prescribed and
such register may be maintained wholly or partly
on computer, floppies or diskettes, subject to
such safeguards as may be prescribed.
The register of designs shall be prima facie
evidence of any matter by this Act directed or
authorized to be entered therein.
Copyright on Registration
Section 11 provides that when a design is
registered, the registered proprietor of the design
shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, have
copyright in the design during ten years from the
date of registration. However, before the
expiration of the said ten years, application for
the extension of the period of copyright is made
to the Controller in the prescribed manner, the
Controller shall, on payment of the prescribed
fee, extend the period of copyright for a second
period of five years from the expiration of the
original period of ten years.
High Court of Delhi in the case of Microfibers
Inc. vs. Girdhar and Co. and Anr. had inter alia
criteria observed the following guidelines:
a. The definition of artistic work has a very wide
connotation as it is not circumscribed by any
limitation of the work possessing any artistic
quality. Even an abstract work, such as a few
lines or curves arbitrarily drawn would qualify as
an artistic work. It may be two dimensional or
three dimensional. The artistic work may or may
not have visual appeal.
b. The rights to which a holder of an original
artistic work is entitled are enumerated in
Section 14(c) of the Copyright Act.
c. It is the exclusive right of the holder of a
Copyright in an original artistic work to reproduce
the work in any material form. For example, a
drawing of an imaginary futuristic automobile,
which is an original artistic work, may be
reproduced in the three-dimensional material
from using an element, such as a metal sheet.
d. The design protection in case of registered
works under the Designs Act cannot be
extended to include the copyright protection to
the works which were industrially produced.
e. A perusal of the Copyright Act and the
Designs Act and indeed the Preamble and the
Statement of Objects and Reasons of the
Designs Act makes it clear that the legislative
intent was to grant a higher protection to pure
original artistic works such as paintings,
sculptures etc and lesser protection to design
activity which is commercial in nature. The
legislative intent is, thus, clear that the protection
accorded to a work which is commercial in
nature is lesser than and not to be equated with
the protection granted to a work of pure Article.

f. The original paintings/artistic works which may
be used to industrially produce the designed
article would continue to fall within the meaning
of the artistic work defined under Section 2(c) of
the Copyright Act, 1957 and would be entitled to
the full period of copyright protection as evident
from the definition of the design under Section
2(d) of the Designs Act. However, the intention
of producing the artistic work is not relevant.
g. This is precisely why the legislature not only
limited the protection by mandating that the
copyright shall cease under the Copyright Act in
a registered design but in addition, also deprived
copyright protection to designs capable of being
registered under the Designs Act, but not so
registered, as soon as the concerned design had
been applied more than 50 times by industrial
process by the owner of the copyright or his
licensee.
h. In the original work of art, copyright would
exist and the author/holder would continue
enjoying the longer protection granted under the
Copyright Act in respect of the original artistic
work per se.
i. If the design is registered under the Designs
Act, the design would lose its copyright
protection under the Copyright Act. If it is a
design registrable under the Designs Act but has
not so been registered, the design would
continue to enjoy copyright protection under the
Act so long as the threshold limit of its
application on an article by an industrial process
for more than 50 times is reached. But once that
limit is crossed, it would lose its copyright
protection under the Copyright Act. This
interpretation would harmonize the Copyright
and the Designs Act in accordance with the
legislative intent.
What is the duration of the registration of a
design? Can it be extended?
The duration of the registration of a design is
initially ten years from the date of registration,
but in cases where claim to priority has been
allowed the duration is ten years from the priority
date. This initial period of registration may be
extended by further period of 5 years on an
application made to the Controller before the
expiry of the said initial period of ten years.
Restoration of Lapsed Designs
Section 12 of the Act provides that where a
design has ceased to have effect by reason of
failure to pay the fee for the extension of
copyright, the proprietor of such design or his
legal representative and where the design was
held by two or more persons jointly, then, with
the leave of the Controller one or more of them
without joining the others, may, within one year
from the date on which the design ceased to
have effect, make an application for the
restoration of the design in the prescribed
manner on payment of such fee as may be
prescribed.
An application under this section shall contain a
statement, verified in the prescribed manner,
fully setting out the circumstances which led to
the failure to pay the prescribed fee, and the
Controller may require from the applicant such
further evidence as he may think necessary.
Can the Registration of a Design be cancelled?
                                                    ? That the
According to Section 19 of the Act, the             design has
registration of a design may be cancelled at any been
time after the registration of design on a petition previously
for cancellation in prescribed form with fee to the registered in
Controller of Designs on the following grounds: India; or
                                                                                                                                It is not a
                                                                    That it has been                                            design
                                                                    published in India                         Design is        under
                                                                    or elsewhere prior     The design is       not              Clause (d)
                                                                    to date of             not new or          registrable;     of Section
                                                         ?          registration; or   ?   original; or    ?   or           ?   2.
Designs to bind government
As per Section 20 a registered design shall have
to all intents the like effect as against the
Government as it has against any person and
the provisions of Chapter XVII of the Patents
Act, 1970 shall apply to registered designs as
they apply to patents.
Piracy of Registered Design
During the existence of copyright in any design it
shall not be lawful for any person, without the
license or written consent of the registered
proprietor:
i. for the purpose of sale to apply or cause to be
applied, to any article in any class of articles in
which the design is registered, the design or any
fraudulent or obvious imitation thereof, or to do
anything with a view to enable the design to be
so applied;
                                                     iii. to publish
                                                     or expose or
                                                     cause to be
                                                     published or
                                                     exposed for
                                                     sale, that
ii. to import such article for the purposes of sale; article.
What is Piracy of a Design?
Piracy of a design means the application of a
design or its imitation to any article belonging to
class of articles in which the design has been
registered for the purpose of sale or importation
of such articles without the written consent of the
registered proprietor. Publishing such articles or
exposing terms for sale with knowledge of the
unauthorized application of the design to them
also involves piracy of the design.
Industrial and International Exhibitions
The exhibition of a design, or of any article to
which a design is applied, at an industrial or
other exhibition to which the provisions of this
section have been extended by the Central
Government by notification in the Official
Gazette, or the publication of a description of the
design, during or after the period of the holding
of the exhibition, or the exhibition of the design or
the article or the publication of a description of
the design by any person else-where during or
after the period of the holding of the exhibition,
without the privity or consent of the proprietor,
shall not prevent the design from being
registered or invalidate the registration thereof.
It may be noted that-
(a) the exhibitor exhibiting the design or article,
or publishing a description of the design, gives to
the Controller previous notice in the prescribed
form; and
(b) the application for registration is made within
six months from the date of first exhibiting the
design or article or publishing a description of the
design.
Appeal
                                                                                                                              iv. an order
                                                                                                                              under
                                                                                                                              Section 35,
                                                                                                                iii. an order refusing
                                                                                                 an order under under         registration
                                                                                                 Section 19,    Section 31, on the
                                                                       an order under
                                                                                                 passed in a    passed in a ground of
An appeal lies to the High Court against an order                      Section 5, refusing
                                                                                                 cancellation   rectification public order
passed by the Controller under the following                           registration of a
                                                                                                 petition;      petition;     or morality.
provisions:                                       i.                   design;             ii.
Every appeal shall be made within three months
of the date of the order of the Controller. The
date of such order is the date on which the order
is dispatched.
In calculating the said period of three months,
the time taken in granting a copy of the order
appealed against shall be excluded.
The High Court may, if it thinks fit, obtain the
assistance of an expert in deciding such
appeals, and the decision of the High Court shall
be final.

LESSON ROUND-UP
                                                    ? The
                                                    objective of
                                                    the Designs
                                                    Act, 2000 is
                                                    to protect new
                                                    or original
                                                    designs so
                                                    created to be
                                                    applied or
* Industrial designs refer to creative activity     applicable to
which result in the ornamental or formal            particular
appearance of a product and design right refers article to be
to a novel or original design that is accorded to manufactured
the proprietor of a validly registered design.      by Industrial
Industrial designs are an element of intellectual Process or
property.                                           means.
* Design means only the features of shape,
configuration, pattern or ornament or
composition of lines or colour or combination
thereof applied to any article whether two
dimensional or three dimensional or in both
forms, by any industrial process or means,
whether manual, mechanical or chemical,
separate or combined, which in the finished
article appeal to and are judged solely by the
eye, but does not include any mode or principle
or construction or anything which is in substance
a mere mechanical device, and does not include
any trade mark, as define in clause (v) of sub-
section of Section 2 of the Trade and
Merchandise Marks Act, 1958, property mark or
artistic works as defined under Section 2(c) of
the Copyright Act, 1957.
* The registration of a design confers upon the
registered proprietor 'Copyright' in the design for
the period of registration. 'Copyright' means the
exclusive right to apply a design to the article
belonging to the class in which it is registered.
* Piracy of a design means the application of a
design or its imitation to any article belonging to
class of articles in which the design has been
registered for the purpose of sale or importation
of such articles without the written consent of the
registered proprietor.
TEST YOURSELF
(These are meant for re-capitulation only.
Answers to these questions are not to be
submitted for evaluation.)
1. What is meant by 'Design' under the Designs
Act, 2000?
2. What is the object of registration of Designs?
3. What is the effect of registration of design?
4. What is piracy of a Design?
5. What is the penalty for the piracy of a
registered Design?
LIST OF FURTHER READINgS
? Bare Act - The Designs Act, 2009 and rules
made thereunder. ? Intellectual Property Laws
and Practice - Elizabeth Verkey
OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDINg
WEbSITES / vIDEO LINKS)

? https://ipindia.gov.in/designs.htm

WARNINg
Regulation 27 of the Company Secretaries
Regulations, 1982
In the event of any misconduct by a registered
student or a candidate enrolled for any
examination conducted by the Institute, the
Council or any Committee formed by the Council
in this regard, may suo-moto or on receipt of a
complaint, if it is satisfied that, the misconduct is
proved after such investigation as it may deem
necessary and after giving such student or
candidate an opportunity of being heard,
suspend or debar him from appearing in any one
or more examinations, cancel his examination
result, or registration as a student, or debar him
from re-registration as a student, or take such
action as may be deemed fit.
It may be noted that according to regulation 2(ia)
of the Company Secretaries Regulations, 1982,
'misconduct' in relation to a registered student or
a candidate enrolled for any examination
conducted by the Institute means behaviour in
disorderly manner in relation to the Institute or in
or around an examination centre or premises, or
breach of any provision of the Act, rule,
regulation, notification, condition, guideline,
direction, advisory, circular of the Institute, or
adoption of malpractices with regard to postal or
oral tuition or resorting to or attempting to resort
to unfair means in connection with writing of any
examination conducted by the Institute, or
tampering with the Institute's record or database,
writing or sharing information about the Institute
on public forums, social networking or any print
or electronic media which is defamatory or any
other act which may harm, damage, hamper or
challenge the secrecy, decorum or sanctity of
examination or training or any policy of the
Institute.
ExECUTIvE PROgRAMME
ECONOMIC, COMMERCIAL &
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAWS gROUP 2 ?
PAPER 6
(This test paper is for practice and self-study
only and not to be sent to the Institute)
TEST PAPER
                                                    Maximum
Time Allowed: 3 Hours                               Marks: 100
All questions are compulsory.
Marks for each question is indicated alongside of
the question.
PART I: ECONOMIC & COMMERCIAL LAWS
(60 MARKS)
1. Choose the correct answer(s) and justify the
same:
i. Mr. " X" purchased a tractor from ABC Ltd. for
tilling the land but he used it in idle time for
transportation of agricultural produce on hire.
Some defects were developed in the engine of
the tractor. He complained to ABC Ltd., but all in
vain. Then he filed a suit in Consumer Disputes
Redressal Forum for damages caused by the
defects. ABC Ltd. pleaded that Mr. X is not a
'consumer' within the definition of section 2(7) of
the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, as he is
using the tractor for commercial purposes.
Whether Mr. X will used the tractor for
commercial purpose?
(a) Commercial Purpose includes use by a
person of goods bought and used by him
exclusively for the purpose of earning his
livelihood, by means of self-employment; the
expressions "buys any goods" and "hires or
avails any services" includes offline or online
transactions through electronic means or by
teleshopping or direct selling or multi-level
marketing. Mr. X is making use of his tractor for
commercial purposes.

(b) Commercial Purpose does not include use by
a person of goods bought and used by him
exclusively for the purpose of earning his
livelihood, by means of self-employment; the
expressions "buys any goods" and "hires or
avails any services" includes offline or online
transactions through electronic means or by
teleshopping or direct selling or multi-level
marketing. Usage by Mr. X does not fall under
the preview of commercial purpose.
(c) Any person who hires or avails of any service
for a consideration which has been paid or
promised or partly paid and partly promised, or
under any system of deferred payment.
(d) The first half will be treated as personal use
and second half as commercial use. He is into
hire purchase business.
ii. Mrs. "S", an Indian resident is planning to visit
Paris and enjoy her holiday there in the month of
May, 2023 and after returning to India again
plans to visit England in winters to attend her
friend's wedding there. She also runs a business
in Japan for which she needs to visit Japan
frequently as business visits within a year. She
needs your opinion regarding permissible limit
for obtaining foreign exchange from Authorized
Dealer. Advise her by choosing the correct
answer and also justify the same.
Test Paper
(a) She can withdraw a maximum permissible
limit upto USD 1, 50,000 in one Financial Year.
(b) She can withdraw a maximum permissible
limit upto USD 2, 50,000 in one Calendar Year.
                                                     (d) She can
                                                     withdraw a
                                                     maximum
                                                     permissible
                                                     limit upto
                                                     USD 3,
                                                     00,000 in one
(c) She can withdraw a maximum permissible           Financial
limit upto USD 2, 50,000 in one Financial Year. Year.
iii. "ABZ" is an association of producers, sellers
or distributors, traders or service providers who,
by agreement amongst themselves, limit control
or attempt to control the production, distribution,
sale or price of or, trade in goods or provision of
services is known as _____________.
(a) Resale price maintenance includes any
agreement to sell goods on condition that the
prices to be charged on resale by the purchaser
shall be the prices stipulated by the seller unless
it is clearly stated that prices lower than those
prices may be charged.
(b) Exclusive distribution agreement includes any
agreement to limit, restrict or withhold the output
or supply of any goods or allocate any area or
market for the disposal or sale of the goods.
(c) Cartel that includes an association of
producers, sellers or distributors, traders or
service providers
who, by agreement amongst themselves, limit
control or attempt to control the production,
distribution, sale or price of or, trade in goods or
provision of services.
(d) Bidding, as a practice, is intended to enable
the procurement of goods or services on the
most favourable terms and conditions.
iv. Mr. "A" is Karta of a Hindu undivided family
held property for his benefit or benefit of other
members in the family and the consideration for
such property has been provided or paid out of
the known sources of the Hindu undivided family.
The property held by Mr. "A" is known as:
(a) Benami Transaction
(b) Exception to the benami transaction
(c) Fugitive Property
(d) Mr. "A" indulged in Money Laundering.
v. Mr. "XY" appointed as Development
Commissioner under Special Economic Zones
Act, 2000. Which of the following are the
functions of Mr. "XY":
(a) Ensure and take suitable steps for effective
promotion of exports from the Special Economic
Zone;
(b) Discharge such functions as may be
assigned to him by the Central Government
under SEZ Act or any other law for the time
being in force;
(c) Guide the entrepreneurs for setting up of        (d) All of the
Units in the Special Economic Zone;                  above.
vi. Elite Club is a club of eight Indian banks. The
club covers entire Indian Territory for its
operations and dealings. The club covered entire
India with a view of fixing rates of deposits,
lending and other rates on banking facilities. The
club covered all banking products and services
and members of the club fixed interest rates for
loans and savings for private/household
including commercial customers; as well as the
fees consumers had to pay for certain services.
The club also provides services for money
transfers and export financing. One of the
customers of a 'Bank', which is a member of the
club, made a complaint against the club to the
Competition Commission of India. The action of
the Elite Club is:
(a) Cartel that includes an association of
producers, sellers or distributors, traders or
service providers
who, by agreement amongst themselves, limit
control or attempt to control the production,
distribution, sale or price of or, trade in goods or
provision of services.
(b) The complaint made by the customer not
valid.
(c) Refusal to deal that includes any agreement,
which restricts, or is likely to restrict, by any
method the persons or classes of persons to
whom goods are sold or from whom goods are
bought.
(d) Tie-in agreement that includes any
agreement requiring a purchaser of goods, as a
condition of such purchase, to purchase some
other goods.
(2 marks each)
                                                     Discuss
                                                     Foreign
                                                     Source as
                                                     defined under
                                                     Foreign
                                                     Contribution
                                                     (Regulation)
2. (a)                                               Act, 2010.
(b) Enumerate recognised lender under External
Borrowing Direction issued by Reserve Bank of
India?
(c) What is money laundering? Discuss the
process of money laundering.
(4 marks each) Attempt all parts of either Q.No.3
or Q.No.3A
3. (a) Discuss briefly the class(es) of Capital
Account Transactions under Foreign Exchange
Management (Permissible Capital Account
Transactions) Regulations, 2000.
                                                     (b) State the
                                                     procedure for
                                                     establishment
                                                     of Special
                                                     Economic
                                                     Zone.

(6 marks each) OR (Alternate question to
Q.No.3)
3A. ( i) List out the permitted sectors where
Foreign Direct Investment are allowed under
Foreign Direct Investment Policy.
(ii) State the transactions or arrangements that
are treated as benami transaction under Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988.
(6 marks each)
4. (a) What Constitutes Abuse of Dominance
under Competition Act, 2002? State the factors,
which are taken into account by the Competition
Commission of India to determine whether the
dominant position of an enterprise would have
the effect of or is likely to have an appreciable
adverse effect on competition in relevant market.
(b) State the persons who are entitled to appear
before the Competition Commission of India
under Competition Act, 2002.
(c) "Carpet Area" and "Common Area" are same
under Real Estate (Regulation & Development)
Act, 2016. Comment.
(4 marks each)
5. (a) Define Commercial Purpose as defined
under Consumer Protection Act, 2019.
(b) Discuss the Power and functions of Central
Consumer Protection Authority under Consumer
Protection Act, 2019.
(c) Discuss about pre-packaged declaration
under Legal Metrology Act, 2009.
(4 marks each)
Test Paper
PART II: INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAWS
(40 MARKS)
6. Choose the correct answer(s) and justify the
same:
(i) Mr. "A" is a resident of India. He wants to
make an application for registration of his patent
in United Kingdom. The invention which he
sought to get patented is relevant to the defence
purposes. He is unaware of the provision
whether he can make such application.
(a) A is not allowed to make any application for
registration of patent outside India.
(b) A needs to make application for seeking
written permission from Controller in prescribed
manner who will grant permit with the prior
consent of Central Government.
(c) A needs permission from Controller only and
controller has enough authority to give such
approval alone.
(d) A needs to get approval from Supreme Court.
(ii) Mr. "N" has copyright of his cinematographic
film. He has assigned video rights of his film to
Mrs."H" and satellite rights to Mr. "S" . Mrs. "H "
filed a case against Mr. " N" for assigning the
satellite rights to Mr. "S" as the same lies with
Mrs. "H" due to assignment of video rights to
him. Choose the correct course of action and
justify your answer:
(a) H is correct in suing N for infringement of
rights assigned to him.
(b) Satellite broadcast copyright of film was a
separate right of the Mr. "N" of the film and the
video copyright assigned to H would not include
this.
(c) Mr. "N" can assign Mrs. "H" and Mr. "S" with
both rights as a matter of choice.
(d) Mr. "N" can assign rights to Mr. "S" without
infringing anyone's right.
(iii) Mr. "K" has opened a refreshment lounge by
the name of "Darjeeling Lounge" especially
designed for high end guests. Whether by using
the name "Darjeeling" does Mr. "K" falsely
suggest that goods/ services sold and catered to,
owe their origin to Darjeeling or creates an
impression that it operates under a license from
the Government Authority?
(a) As mostly high-end guests accessed the
lounge, the guests would be generally educated
and knowledgeable and thus, they were not
likely to be confused or mislead by the use of
such name.
(b) The name is misleading the customer and
should not be used.
(c) There is possibility of unfair competition on
the part of Mr. "K".
(d) Case of infringement of Trade Marks.
(iv) Mr. "D" is a famous actor and musician. He
has his own entertainment company managed
by his manager Mr. "M". SRT Private Limited is
manufacturer of toys and has designed a toy
which looks similar to Mr. "D" and sings his
movie song. Mr. "D"'s manager Mr. "M" filed a
case against SRT Private Limited for
infringement of artistic rights to publicity. Is his
contention correct? Justify the answer by
choosing the most appropriate one:
(a) SRT has not infringed any right as D is actor
and anyone can sell toy similar looking to him.
(b) Permanent injunction can be obtained
restraining SRT from producing or selling these
toys as the product creates confusion in the eyes
of the people to think and believe that the toys
being sold were a part of the company managing
D's interests.
(c) The court cannot allow such permanent
injunction to any person.
(d) SRT can use the toys by giving some
compensation money to D.
(2 marks each)
7. (a) Intellectual Property is the Property, which
has been created by exercise of Intellectual
Faculty. Comment.
(b) What is meant by 'Geographical Indication'
under Geographical Indications of Goods
(Registration and Protection) Act, 1999? Give
examples of Geographical Indication.
(c) What are the essential requirements for the
registration of 'design' under the Designs Act,
2000?
(d) What types of inventions are not patentable
in India?
(4 marks each)
8. (a) What is the procedure for registration of a
work under the Copyright Act, 1957?
(b) What is the scope of protection in the
Copyright Act, 1957? Discuss the statutory
exceptions provided under Copyright Act.
(c) What are different types of trademarks that
may be registered in India?
(d) What are the grounds and procedure to
register a patent under the law relating to patents
in India? Once a patent is granted can it be
challenged further? State your answer with
reasons and relevant provisions.
(4 marks each)
